An Introduction for The Sound and the Fury 

The Southern Review 8 (N.S., 1972) 705-10. 

I wrote this book and learned to read. I had learned a little aboutwritingfrom Soldiers' Pay--how to approach language, words: not withseriousness 
so much, as an essayist does, butwith a kind ofalert respect, as you 
approach dynamite; even withjoy, as youapproach women: perhapswith 
the same secretly unscrupulous intentions. But when I finished The Sound 
and the Fury I discovered that there is actually something to which the 
shabby term Art not only can,butmust,be applied. I discovered then that I 
had gone through all that I had ever read, from Henry James throughHenty tonewspaper murders, without making any distinction or digestingany of it, asa moth or a goat might. After The Sound and The Fury and 
without heeding to open another book andin aseries of delayed 
repercussions like summer thunder, I discovered the Flauberts and 
Dostoievskysand Conrads whose books I had read ten years ago. With The 
Sound and the Fury I learned to read and quit reading, since I have read 
nothing since.

Nordo I seem to have learned anything since. While writingSanctuary,
the next novel to The Sound and the Fury, that part ofme which learned as 
I wrote, which perhaps is the very force which drives a writer to the travailof invention and the drudgery of putting seventy-five or a hundredthousand words on paper, was absent because I was still readingby 
repercussion the books which I had swallowed whole ten years and more 
ago. I learned only from the writing of Sanctuary that there was somethingmissing;something which The Sound and the Fury gave me and Sanctuary 
did not. When Ibegan As I Lay Dying I had discovered what it was and 
knew that it would be alsomissingin this case because this wouldbe a 
deliberate book. I set out deliberately to write a tour-de-force. Before I ever 
put pen to paper and set down the first word, I knew what the last word 
would be and almost where the last period would fall. Before I began I said, 
I am going to write a book by which, at a pinch, I can stand or fall if I never 
touch ink again. So when I finished it the cold satisfaction was there, as I 
had expected, but as I had also expected the other quality which The Sound 


and the Fury had given me was absent that emotion definite and physicaland yet nebulous to describe: thatecstasy, that eager and joyous faith and 
anticipation ofsurprise which the yet unmarred sheet beneath myhand 
held inviolate and unfailing waiting for release. It was not there in As I Lay 
Dying. Isaid, It is because I knew too much about thisbookbefore Ibegan 
to write it. I said, More than likelyI shall never again have to know thismuch about abookbefore I begin to write it, and next time it will return. I 
waited almost two years, then I began Light in August,knowingnomore 
about it than a young woman, pregnant, walkingalonga strange country 
road. I thought, I will recapture itnow, since I knowno more about thisbook than I did about The Sound and the Fury when I sat down before the 
first blank page. 

It did not return. The written pages grew in number. The story was 
going pretty well: I would sit down to it each morning without reluctance 
yet still without that anticipation and that joy which alone ever made 
writing pleasure to me. The bookwas almostfinishedbefore I acquiesced 
to the fact that it would not recur, since I wasnow aware before eachword 
was written down just what the people would do, since now I was 
deliberately choosing among possibilities and probabilities of behavior and 
weighing and measuring each choice by the scale of the Jamesesand 
Conrads and Balzacs. I knew that I had read too much, that I had reached 
that stage whichall young writersmust pass through, in which he believes 
that he has learned too much about his trade. I received a copy of the 
printed bookandI found that I didn't even want to see what kind ofjacket 
Smith had put on it. I seemed to have a vision ofit and the other ones 
subsequent to The Sound and The Fury ranked in order upon ashelfwhileI looked at the titled backs of them with a flaggingattention which was 
almost distaste, and upon which each succeeding title registered less and 
less, until at lastAttention itself seemed to say, Thank God I shall never 
need to open any one of them again. I believed that I knew then whyI had 
not recaptured that first ecstasy, and that I should never again recapture it; 
that whatever treenovels I should write in the future would be written 
without reluctance, but also without anticipation or joy: that in the Sound 
and The Fury I had already put perhaps the only thingin literature which 
would ever move me very much: Caddy climbing the pear tree to look in 


the window at her grandmother's funeral while Quentin and Jason and 
Benjy and the negroes looked up at the muddy seat of her drawers. 

This is the only one of the seven novels which I wrote withoutany 
accompanying feeling of drive or effort, or anyfollowingfeeling of 
exhaustion or relief or distaste. When I began it I had no plan atall. I 
wasn't even writing abook. I was thinking ofbooks, publication, onlyin the 
reverse, in saying to myself, I wont have to worry about publishers liking or 
not liking thisat all. Four yearsbefore I had written Soldiers' Pay. It didn't 
take long to write and it got published quickly and made me about five 
hundreddollars. I said, Writingnovels is easy. You dont make muchdoingit, but itis easy. I wrote Mosquitoes. It wasn't quite so easy to write and itdidn't get published quite as quickly and it made me about four hundred 
dollars. I said, Apparently there ismore to writing novels,being anovelist, 
than I thought. I wrote Sartoris. It took much longer, and the publisher 
refused it at once. But I continued to shop it aboutfor three years with a 
stubborn and fading hope, perhaps to justify the time which I hadspent 
writingit. This hope died slowly, thoughit didn't hurt atall. One day I 
seemed to shut a door between me and all publishers' addresses and book 
lists. I said to myself, Now I can write. Now I can make myself a vaselike 
that which the old Roman kept athis bedside and wore the rim slowly away 
with kissing it.So I, who hadnever had a sister and was fated to lose my 
daugher in infancy, set out tomake myself a beautiful and tragic little girl. 

An Introduction to The Sound and the Fury 

Mississippi Quarterly 26 (Summer 1973): 410-415. 

Art is no part of southern life. In the North it seems to be different. It isthe hardest minor stone in Manhattan's foundation. It isa part of the 
glitter or shabbiness of the streets. The arrowing buildings rise out ofit and 
because of it, tobe torn down and arrow again. There will be peopleleading small bourgeois lives (those countless and almostinvisible bones of 
its articulation, lackingany one ofwhich the whole skeleton might 
collapse) whose bread will derive from it--polyglot boys and girls 


progressing from tenement schools to editorial rooms and art galleries, 
men with grey hair and pauncheswho run linotype machines and take up 
tickets at concerts and then go sedately home to Brooklyn and suburban 
stations where children and grandchildren await them--longafter the 
descendants of Irish politicians and Neapolitan racketeers are as forgotten 
as the wild Indiansand the pigeon 

And of Chicago too: of that rhythm not always withharmony or tune 
lusty, loudvoiced, always changing and always young; drawing from a river 
basin which isalmost a continentyoung men and women intoits livingunrest and then spewing them forth again to write Chicago in New England 
and Virginiaand Europe. But in the Southart, to become visible at all,
mustbecome a ceremony, a spectacle; somethingbetween a gypsy 
encampmentand a church bazaar given by a handful of alien mummers 
who must waste themselves in protest and active self-defense until there is 
nothing left with which to speak--a single week, say, of furious endeavor 
for a show to be held on Friday night and then struck and vanished, leavingonly a paint- stiffened smock or aworn out typewriter ribbon in the corner 
and perhaps a small bill for cheesecloth or bunting in the hands of an 
astonished and bewildered tradesman. 

Perhaps this is because the South (I speak in the sense of the indigenous 
dream of any given collection of men having something in common' be it 
only geography and climate, which shape theireconomic and spiritual 
aspirationsinto cities,intoa pattern of houses or behavior) is old since 
dead. New York, whatever it may believe of itself, is young since alive;it is 
still a logicalandunbroken progression from the Dutch.And Chicago even 
boasts of being young. But the South, as Chicago is the Middlewest and 
New York the East, is dead, killedby the Civil War. There is a thing known 
whimsically as the New South tobe sure, butit isnot the south. It isa land 
of Immigrants whoare rebuildingthe towns and cities into replicas of 
towns and cities in Kansasand Iowa and Illinois, with skyscrapers and 
striped canvas awningsinstead of wooden balconies, and teaching the 
young men who sell the gasoline and the waitresses in the restaurants to 
say Oyeah? and to speak with hard r's, and hanging over the intersections 
of quiet and shaded streets where no one save Northern touristsinCadillacs and Lincolns ever pass at a gait faster than a horse trots, 


changing red-and-green lights and savage and peremptory bells. 

Yet this art, which hasno place in southern life, isalmost the sum totalof the Southern artist. It is his breath, blood, flesh,all. Not so much that itis forced backupon him or that he is forced bodily into itby the 
circumstance;forced to choose, lady and tiger fashion, between being an 
artist and being a man. He does itdeliberately; he wishes itso. Thishas 
alwaysbeen true of him and of him alone. OnlySoutherners have taken 
horsewhips and pistols to editors about the treatment or maltreatment of 
their manuscript. This--the actualpistols--wasin the old days, of course, 
we no longer succumb to the impulse. But itis still there, still within us. 

Because it is himself that the Southerner is writing about, notabout his 
environment: who has, figuratively speaking, taken the artistin himin one 
hand and hismilieu in the other and thrust the one into the other like a 
clawing and spitting catintoa croker sack. And he writes. We have never 
got and probably will never get, anywhere with music or the plastic forms. 
We need to talk, to tell, since oratory is our heritage. We seem to try in the 
simple furious breathing (or writing) span of the individual to draw a 
savage indictment of the contemporary scene or to escape from it into a 
makebelieve region of swords and magnoliasand mockingbirds which 
perhaps never existed anywhere. Both of the courses are rooted in 
sentiment; perhaps the ones whowrite savagely and bitterly of the incest in 
clayfloored cabins are the most sentimental. Anyway, each course isa 
matter of violent partisanship, in which the writer unconsciously writes 
into every line and phrase his violent despairs and rages and frustrations 
or his violent prophesies of still more violent hopes. That cold intellect 
which can write with calm and complete detachment and gusto of its 
contemporary scene isnot amongus; I do notbelieve there lives the 
Southern writer who can say without lying that writingis any fun to him.
Perhaps we do not wantit to be. 

I seem tohave tried both of the courses. I have tried to escape and I have 
tried to indict. After five years I look backat The Sound and The Fury and 
see that that was the fuming point:in this book I did bothat one time. 
When I began the book, I hadno plan atall. I wasn't even writing abook. 
Previous to it Ihad written three novels, with progressively decreasing ease 
and pleasure, and reward or emolument. The third one was shopped about 


for three years during which I sentit from publisher to publisher with a 
kind ofstubborn and fading hope of at least justifying the paper I had used 
and the time I had spent writing it. This hope must have died at last, 
because one day it suddenly seemed as if a door had clapped silentlyand 
forever to between me and all publishers' addresses and booklistsand I 
said to myself, Now I can write. Now I can just write. Whereupon I,who 
had three brothers and no sisters and was destined to lose my first 
daughter in infancy, began to write about a little girl.

I did not realise then that I wastrying to manufacture the sister which I 
did not have and the daughter which I was to lose, though the formermight have been apparent from the fact that Caddy had three brothersalmost before I wrote her name on paper. I justbegan to write abouta 
brother and a sister splashing one another in the brookand the sister felland wet her clothing and the smallest brother cried, thinking that the sisterwas conquered or perhaps hurt. Or perhaps he knew that he was the babyand that she would quit whatever water battles to comfort him. When she 
did so, when she quit the water fight and stooped in her wet garments 
above him, the entire story, whichis all told by that same little brother inthe first section, seemed to explode on the paper before me. 

I saw that peaceful glinting of that branch was tobecome the dark, 
harsh flowing of time sweeping her to where she could not return to 
comfort him,but that just separation, division, would notbe enoughnot 
far enough. It must sweep her into dishonor and shame too. And that Benjy 
mustnever grow beyond this moment; that for him all knowing mustbeginand end with that fierce, panting, paused and stooping wet figure which 
smelled like trees. That he must never grow up to where the grief of 
bereavement could be leavened with understanding and hence the 
alleviation of rage as in the case ofJason, and of oblivion asin the case of 
Quentin.

I saw that they had been sent to the pasture to spend the afternoon toget them away from the house during the grandmother's funeralin order 
that the three brothers and the nigger children could look up at the muddy 
seat of Caddy's drawers as she climbed the tree to look in the window at the 
funeral, without then realising the symbology of the soiled drawers, for 
here again hers was the courage which was to face later with honor the 


shame which she was to engender, which Quentin and Jason could not 
face: the one taking refuge in suicide, the other in vindictive rage which 
drove him to rob hisbastard niece of the meagre sums which Caddy couldsend her. For I had already gone on to night and the bedroom and Dilsey 
with the mudstained drawers scrubbing the naked backside of that doomed 
little girl--trying to cleanse with the sorry byblow ofits soiling thatbody, 
flesh, whose shame they symbolised and prophesied, as though she already 
saw the dark future and the part she was to play in it trying to hold that 
crumbling household together.

Then the story was complete, finished. There was Dilsey tobe the future, 
to stand above the fallen ruins of the family like a ruined chimney, gaunt, 
patientand indomitable;and Benjy to be the past.He had to be an idiot so 
that, like Dilsey, he could be impervious to the future, thoughunlike her by 
refusing to accept it at all. Without thought or comprehension; shapeless, 
neuter, like something eyeless and voiceless which might have lived, 
existed merely because ofits ability to suffer, in the beginning of life; halffluid, groping: a pallid and helpless mass of all mindless agonyunder sun, 
in time yet not ofit save thathe could nightly carry with him that fierce, 
courageousbeing who was to him buta touchand a sound that maybe 
heard on any golf linksand a smell like trees, into the slow bright shapes of 
sleep.

The story is all there, in the first section asBenjy told it. I did not try 
deliberately to make it obscure; when I realised that the story mightbe 
printed, I took three more sections, all longer than Benjy's, to try to clarify 
it. But when I wrote Benjy's section, I wasnot writing it tobe printed. If I 
were to do it over now I would do it differently, because the writing of it as 
it now stands taught me both howto write and how to read, and even 
more: It taught me what I had already read, because on completingit I 
discovered, in a series of repercussions like summer thunder, the Flauberts 
and Conrads and Turgenievs which as much as ten years before I had 
consumed whole and without assimilatingat all, asa moth or a goat might. 
I have read nothing since; I have not had to. And I have learned but one 
thing since about writing. Thatis,that the emotion definite and physicaland yet nebulous to describe which the writing ofBenjy's section ofThe 
Sound and The Fury gave me--that ecstasy, that eager and joyous faith and 


anticipation ofsurprise which the yet unmarred sheets beneath my hand 
held inviolate and unfailing--will not return. The unreluctance to begin, the 
cold satisfaction in work well andarduously done, is there and will 
continue tobe there as long as I can do it well. But that other will not 
return. I shallnever know it again.

So I wrote Quentin's and Jason's sections, trying to clarify Benjy's. But I 
saw that I wasmerely temporising; That I should have to get completely 
out ofthe book. I realised that there would be compensations, thatin a 
sense I could then give a final turn to the screw and extract some ultimate 
distillation. Yet it took me better than a month to take pen and writeThe 
day dawned bleak and chill before I did so. There is a story somewhere 
about an old Roman who kept at his bedside a Tyrrhenian vase which he 
loved and the rim of which he wore slowly away with kissingit. I had made 
myself a vase,but I suppose I knew all the time that I could not live forever 
inside of it, that perhaps to have itso that I too could lie in bed and look at 
it would be better; surely so when that day should come when not only the 
ecstasy of writing wouldbe gone, but the unreluctance and the somethingworth saying too. It's fine to thinkthat you will leave something behind you 
when you die,butit's better to have made somethingyou can die with. 
Much better the muddybottom ofa little doomed girl climbinga bloomingpear tree in April to look in the window at the funeral.
Oxford.

19 August, 1933. 


April 7, 1928 

Through the fence, between the curling flower spaces, I could see them 
hitting. They were coming toward where the flag was and I went along the 
fence. Luster was huntingin the grass by the flower tree. They tookthe flag 
out, and they were hitting. Then they put the flagback and they wentto the 
table, and he hit and the other hit.Then they went on,and I went along the 
fence. Luster came away from the flower tree and we went along the fence 
and they stopped and we stopped and I looked through the fence whileLuster was hunting in the grass. 
"Here, caddie." He hit. They wentaway across the pasture. I held to the 
fence and watched them going away. 
"Listen at you, now." Luster said. "Aint you something, thirty three years 
old, going on that way.After I done went all the way to town to buy you 
that cake. Hushup thatmoaning.Aint you going to help me find that 
quarter so I can go to the show tonight." 
They were hitting little, across the pasture. I went back along the fence to 
where the flag was. It flapped on the bright grassand the trees. 
"Come on." Luster said. "We done looked there. They aint no more comingright now. Les go down to the branch and find that quarter before them 
niggers findsit." 
It was red, flapping on the pasture. Then there was a bird slanting and 
tilting on it. Luster threw. The flag flapped on the bright grass and the 
trees. I held to the fence.
"Shutup that moaning." Luster said. "I cant make them come if theyaintcoming, can I. If you dont hush up, mammyaint going to have no birthday 
for you. If you donthush, youknow what I going to do. I going to eat that 
cake all up. Eat them candles, too. Eat all them thirty three candles. Come 
on, les go down to the branch. I got to find myquarter. Maybe we can findone of they balls.Here. Here they is. Way over yonder. See." He came to 
the fence and pointed his arm."See them. They aint comingbackhere no 
more. Come on.
We went along the fence and came to the garden fence, where our shadowswere. My shadow was higher than Luster's on the fence. We came to the 
hroken place and went through it. 


"Waita minute." Luster said. "You snagged on that nailagain. Cant you 
never crawl through here withoutsnagging on that nail." 
4.1

Caddy uncaught me and we crawled through. Uncle Maury said to not letanybody see us, so we better stoop over, Caddy said. Stoop over, Benjy. 
Like this, see. We stooped over and crossed the garden, where the flowers 
rasped and rattled against us. The ground was hard. We climbed the 
fence, where the pigs were grunting and snuffing. I expect they're sorry 
because one of them got killed today, Caddy said. The ground was hard, 
churned and knotted. Keep your hands in your pockets, Caddy said. Or 
they'll get froze. You dont want your hands froze on Christmas, do you. 

3.1"It's too cold out there." Versh said. "You dont want to go outdoors." 
"Whatis itnow." Mother said. 
"He want to go out doors." Versh said. 
"Let him go." Uncle Maury said. 
"It's too cold." Mother said."He'd better stay in. Benjamin. Stop that, 
now."
"It wont hurt him." Uncle Maury said. 
"You,Benjamin." Mother said. "Ifvou dontbe good, you'll have to go to the 
kitchen."
"Mammy say keep him out the kitchen today." Versh said. "She sayshe got 
all that cooking to get done." 
"Let him go, Caroline." Uncle Maury said. "You'll worry yourself sickover 
him."
"I knowit." Mother said. "It'sa judgment on me. I sometimes wonder." 
"I know, Iknow." Uncle Maury said. "You must keep your strength up. I'llmake you a toddy."
"It just upsets me that much more." Mother said."Dontyou know it does." 
"You'll feel better. " Uncle Maury said. "Wrap him up good, boy,andtake 
him out for a while." 
Uncle Maury went away. Versh went away. 
"Please hush." Mother said. "We're trying to get you out asfastas we can. I 
dont want you to get sick."
Versh put my overshoes and overcoat on and we took my cap and went out. 


Uncle Maury was putting the bottle away in the sideboard in the 
diningroom.
"Keep him outabout half an hour, boy." Uncle Maury said. "Keep him in 
the yard, now."
"Yes, sir."Versh said. "We dontnever let him get off the place." 
We went out doors. The sun was cold and bright. 
"Where you heading for." Versh said. "You dont think you going to town, 
doesyou." We went through the rattling leaves. The gate was cold. "You 
better keep them hands in your pockets." Versh said. "You get them froze 
onto that gate, then what you do.Whyn't you wait for them in the house." 
He put my hands intomy pockets.I could hear him rattling in the leaves. I 
could smell the cold. The gate was cold. 
"Here some hickeynuts. Whooey.Gitup that tree. Look here at this squirl,
Benjy." I couldn't feel the gate at all, but I could smell the bright cold. "You 
better put them hands back in your pockets." 
Caddy was walking. Then she wasrunning, her booksatchel swinging and 
jouncing behind her. 
"Hello, Benjy." Caddy said.She opened the gate and came in and stooped 
down. Caddy smelled like leaves. "Did you come to meet me." she said. 
"Did you come to meet Caddy. What did you let him get his hands socoldfor, Versh.""I told him to keep them in his pockets." Versh said. "Holdingon to thatahun gate."
"Did you come to meet Caddy." she said, rubbingmy hands. "What is it. 
What are youtrying to tell Caddy." Caddy smelled like trees and like when 
she says we were asleep. 
19.2

What are you moaning about, Luster said. You can watch them againwhen we get to the branch. Here. Here's you a jimson weed. He gave me 
the flower. We went through the fence, into the lot. 

3.2"Whatis it." Caddy said "What are you trying to tell Caddy. Did theysend 
him out, Versh."
"Couldn't keep him in." Versh said. "He kept on until they let him goand 
he come right straight down here,looking through the gate." 
"Whatis it." Caddy said. "Did youthink it wouldbe Christmas when I came 


home from school. Is that what you thought. Christmasis the day after 
tomorrow. SantyClaus, Benjy.Santy Claus. Come on, let's run to the house 
and get warm."She took my hand and we ran through the bright rustlingleaves. We ran up the steps and out of the bright cold, into the dark cold. 
Uncle Maury was putting the bottle back in the sideboard. He called Caddy. 
Caddy said, 
"Take him in to the fire, Versh.Gowith Versh."she said. "I'll come in a 
minute."
We went to the fire. Mother said, 
"Is he cold, Versh." 
"Nome."Versh said. 
"Take his overcoat and overshoesoff." Mother said. "How many times do I 
have to tell you not tobring him into the house with his overshoes on. 
"Yessum."Versh said. "Hold still,now."He took my overshoes off and 
unbuttoned my coat. Caddy said, 
"Wait,Versh. Cant he go out again, Mother. I want him to go with me. 
"You'd better leave him here."Uncle Maury said. "He's been out enough 
today."
"I think you'd bothbetter stay in."Mother said. "It's getting colder, Dilsey 
says."
"Oh, Mother." Caddy said. 
"Nonsense."Uncle Maury said. "She's been in school all day.She needs the 
fresh air. Run along, Candace." 
"Let him go, Mother." Caddy said. "Please. You know he'll cry." 
"Then why did you mention itbefore him." Mother said. "Why did you 
come in here. To give him some excuse to worry me again. You've been out 
enough today. I think you'd better sit down here and play with him." 
"Let them go, Caroline."Uncle Maury said. "A little cold wont hurt them. 
Remember, you've got to keep your strength up. 
"I know." Mother said. "Nobody knows how I dread Christmas. Nobody 
knows. I am not one of those women who can stand things. I wish for 
Jason's and the children's sakes Iwas stronger."
"You must do the best you can and not let them worry you. "Uncle Maury 
said. "Run along. you two. But dont stay out long,now. Your motherwillworry." 


"Yes, sir."Caddy said. "Come on, Benjy. We're going out doors again." She 
buttoned my coat and we went toward the door.
"Are you going to take thatbaby out without his overshoes." Mothersaid. 
"Do you want tomake him sick, with the house full of company." 
"I forgot." Caddy said."I thought he had them on. We went back. "You 
must think." Mother said. Hold still now Versh said.He put my overshoes 
on. "Someday I'll be gone, and you'll have to think for him." Now stomp 
Versh said."Come here and kiss Mother, Benjamin." 
Caddy took me to Mother's chair and Mother took my face in her hands 
and then she held me against her. 
"My poor baby." she said. She let me go. "YouandVersh take good care of 
him, honey."
"Yessum." Caddy said. We went out. Caddy said, 
"Youneedn't go, Versh. I'll keep him for a while." 
"All right." Versh said. "Iaint going out in that cold for no fun."He went on 
and we stopped in the hall and Caddy knelt and put her armsaround me 
and her cold bright face against mine. She smelled like trees. 
"You're not a poorbaby. Are you.Are you. You've gotyour Caddy. Haven't 
you got your Caddy."
19.3

Cant you shut up that moaning and slobbering, Luster said. Aint you 
shamed of yourself, making all this racket. We passed the carriage house, 
where the carriage was. It had a new wheel. 

17.1"Git in, now,and set stilluntil your maw come." Dilsey said. She shoved 
me into the carriage. T.P. held the reins. "Clare I dont see how come Jason 
wont get a new surrey." Dilsey said. "This thing going to fall to piecesunder 
you all some day. Look at them wheels."
Mother came out, pulling her veildown. She had some flowers. 
"Where's Roskus." she said. 
"Roskus cant lift hisarms, today."Dilsey said. "T.P. can drive all right." 
"I'm afraid to." Mother said. "It seems to me you all could furnishme with 
a driver forthe carriage once a week. It's little enough I ask, Lord knows." 
"You know justas well as me thatRoskus got the rheumatism too bad to do 
more than he have to, Miss Cahline." Dilsey said. "You come on andget in, 


now. T.P. can drive you just as good as Roskus." 
"I'm afraid to." Mother said. "With the baby." Dilsey wentup the steps. 
"You calling that thing ababy." she said. She tookMother's arm. "Aman 
bigas T.P. Come on, now,if you going." 
"I'm afraid to." Mother said. They came down the steps andDilsey helped 
Mother in. "Perhaps it'll be the best thing,for all of us." Mother said. 
"Aint you shamed, talking that way." Dilsey said."Dont you know it'll take 
more than a eighteen year old nigger to make Queenie run away.She older 
than him and Benjy put together. And dont you startno projeckingwith 
Queenie, you hear me. T.P. If youdont drive to suit Miss Cahline, I going to 
put Roskus on you. He aint too tied up to do that." 
"Yessum." T.P. said. 
"I just know something will happen." Mother said. "Stop, Benjamin. 
"Give him a flower to hold." Dilsey said. "That what he wanting."She 
reached her hand in.
"No, no." Mother said. "You'll have them all scattered." 
"You hold them." Dilseysaid."I'll get him one out."She gave me a flower 
and her handwent away.
"Go on now, fore Quentin see youand have to go too." Dilsey said. 
"Where is she." Mother said. 
"She down to the house playing with Luster." Dilsey said."Go on, T.P. 
Drive that surrey like Roskus told you, now. 
"Yessum." T.P. said."Hum up, Queenie." 
"Quentin." Mother said. "Dont let " 
"Course Iis." Dilsey said. 
The carriage jolted and crunched on the drive. "I'm afraid to go and leave 
Quentin." Mother said. "I'd better not go. T.P." We went through the gate, 
where it didn't jolt anymore. T.P. hit Queenie with the whip. 
"You, T.P." Mother said. 
"Got to get her going." T.P.said."Keep her wake up till we get back to the 
barn."
"Turn around." Mother said. "I'm afraid to go and leave Quentin." 
"Cant turn here." T.P. said. Then it was broader. 
"Cant you turn here." Mother said. 
"All right." T.P. said. We began to turn. 


"You, T.P." Mother said, clutchingme.
"I got to turn around some how."T.P. said. "Whoa, Queenie." We stopped. 
"You'll turn us over."Mother said. 
"What you want to do, then." T.P.said.
"I'm afraid for you to try to turn around." Mother said. 
"Getup, Queenie." T.P. said. We went on. 
"I just know Dilsey will let something happen toQuentin while I'm gone." 
Mother said. "We must hurry back." 
"Hum up,' there." T.P. said.He hitQueenie with the whip. 
"You, T.P." Mother said, clutchingme. I could hear Qucenie's feet and the 
bright shapes went smooth and steady on both sides, the shadows of them 
flowingacross Queenie's back. They went on like the bright tops of wheels. 
Then those on one side stopped at the tall white post where the soldier was. 
But on the other side they went on smooth and steady, but a little slower. 
"What do you want."Jason said. He had his hands in his pockets and a 
pencil behind his ear. 
"We're going to the cemetery." Mother said. 
"All right." Jason said."I dont aim to stop you, do I. Was that all you 
wanted with me, just to tell me that." 
"I know you wont come." Mother said. "I'd feel safer if you would." 
"Safe from what." Jason said. "Father and Quentin canthurt you." 
Mother put her handkerchiefunder her veil. "Stop it, Mother."Jason said. 
"Do you want to get that damn looney to bawlingin the middle of the 
square. Drive on, T.P."
"Hum up, Queenie." T.P. said. 
"It's a judgment on me." Mother said. "But I'll be gone too, soon. 
"Here."Jason said. 
"Whoa." T.P. said. Jason said, 
"Uncle Maury's drawing on youfor fifty. What do you want to do about it." 
"Why ask me." Mother said. "I dont have any say so. I trynot to worry you 
and Dilsey. I'll be gone soon, and then you" 
"Go on, T.P." Jason said. 
"Hum up, Queenie." T.P. said. The shapes flowed on. The ones on thc other 
side began again, bright and fast and smooth, like when Caddy sayswe are 
going to sleep. 


19.4

Cry baby, Luster said. Aint you shamed. We went through the barn. The 
stalls were all open. You aint got no spotted pony to ride now, Luster said. 
The floor was dry and dusty. The roof was falling. The slanting holes 
were full of spinning yellow. What do you want to go that way, for. Youwant to get your head knocked off with one of them balls. 

4.2“Keep your hands in your pockets." Caddy said. "Or they'll be froze. You 
dont want your hands froze on Christmas, do you." 
We went around the barn. The bigcow and the little one were standing inthe door, and we could hear Prince and Queenie and Fancy stompinginside the barn. "Ifit wasn't so cold, we'd ride Fancy." Caddy said. "But it's 
too cold to hold on today." Then we could seethe branch, where the smoke 
was blowing."That's where they are killing the pig." Caddy said. "We can 
come back by there and see them." We went down the hill.
"You want to carry the letter." Caddy said. "You can carry it."She took the 
letter out of her pocket and put it in mine. "It's aChristmas present." 
Caddy said. "Uncle Mauryis going to surprise Mrs Patterson with it.We 
got to give it to her without lettinganybody see it.Keep your hands in your 
pockets good, now." We came to the branch. 
"It's froze." Caddy said."Look."She broke the top of the water and held a 
piece of it againstmy face. "Ice. That means how cold it is." She helped me 
across and we went up the hill. "We cant even tell Mother and Father. You 
know what I think it is. I thinkit's a surprise for Mother and Father and MrPatterson both,because Mr Patterson sentyou some candy. Do youremember when Mr Patterson sent you some candy last summer. 
There was a fence. The vine was dry, and the wind rattled in it. 
"Only I dont see why Uncle Maury didn't send Versh."Caddy said. "Versh 
wont tell." Mrs Patterson was looking out the window. "You wait here." 
Caddy said. "Wait right here, now.I'll be back in a minute.Give me the 
letter." She took the letter out of my pocket. "Keep your handsin your 
pockets." She climbed the fence withthe letter in her hand and went 
through the brown, rattling flowers. Mrs Patterson came to the door and 
opened it and stood there. 
5.1 


Mr Patterson was chopping in the green flowers. He stopped choppingand looked at me. Mrs Patterson came across the garden, running. When 
I saw her eyes I began to cry. You idiot, Mrs Patterson said, I told himnever to send you alone again. Give it to me. Quick. Mr Patterson came 
fast, with the hoc. Mrs Patterson leaned across the fence, reaching her 
hand. She was trying to climb the fence. Give it to me, she said, Give it to 
me. Mr Patterson climbed the fence. He took the letter. Mrs Patterson'sdress was caught on the fence. I saw her eyes again and I ran down the 
hill.

19.5"They aint nothing over yonder but houses." Luster said. "We going down 
to the branch."
They were washing down at the branch. One of them was singing. I couldsmell the clothes flapping,and the smoke blowingacross the branch. 
"You stay down here." Luster said. "Youaint got nobusinessup yonder. 
Them folks hit you, sho."
"What he want to do."
"He dontknow whathe want to do." Luster said. "He think he want to go 
up yonder where they knocking that hall. Yousit down here and play with 
your jimson weed. Look at them chillen playingin the branch, if yougot to 
look at something.How come youcant behave yourself like folks." I sat 
down on the bank, where they were washing, and the smoke blowingblue. 
"Is you all seen anything of a quarter down here." Luster said."What 
quarter."
""The one I had here this morning." Luster said. "I lost it somewhere. It fellthrough this here hole in my pocket. If I dont find it I cant go to the show 
tonight."
"Where'd you get a quarter, boy. Find it in white folks' pocket while they 
aint looking." 
"Gotit at the getting place." Luster said "Plenty more where that one come 
ftom. Only I got to find that one. Is you all found it yet." 
"I aint studying no quarter. I got my own business to tend to." 
"Come on here." Luster said."Help me look for it." 
"He wouldn't knowa quarter if he was to see it, would he.""He can helplook just the same." Luster said. "You all going to the show tonight." 


"Dont talk to me about no show. Time I get done over this here tub Ibe too 
tired to lift my hand to do nothing." 
"I bet you be there." Luster said. "I bet you was there last night. I betyou 
all be right there when that tent open."Be enoughniggers there without 
me. Was lastnight." 
"Nigger's money good as white folks, I reckon." 
"White folks givesnigger money because knowfirst white man comes 
along with a band going to getit all back, sonigger can go to workfor some 
more."
"Aint nobody goingmake you go to that show." 
"Aint yet. Aint thought of it, I reckon." 
"What you got against white folks." 
"Aint got nothing against them. I goes my way and lets white folks go 
theirs. I aint studying that show."
"Gota man in it can playa tune on a saw. Play it like a banjo." 
"You go last night." Luster said. "Igoing tonight If I can find where I lost 
that quarter."
"You goingtake him with you, I reckon." 
"Me." Luster said. "You reckon Ibe found anywhere with him, time he start 
bellering."
"What does you do when he start bellering." 
"I whips him." Luster said. He satdown and rolled up his overalls. They 
played in the branch. 
"Youall found anyballs yet." Luster said. 
"Aint you talkingbiggity. Ibet youbetter not let your grandmammy hear 
you talking like that." 
Luster got into the branch, where they were playing. He hunted in the 
water, along the bank. 
"I had it when we was down here this morning." Luster said. 
"Where boutsyou lose it." 
"Right out this here hole in my pocket." Luster said. They hunted in the 
branch. Then they all stood up quick and stopped, then they splashed and 
foughtin the branch. Luster got itand they squatted in the water, lookingup the hill through the bushes.
"Where is they." Luster said. 


"Aint in sight yet."
Luster put it in his pocket. They came down the hill.
"Did a hall come down here."
"It ought tobe in the water. Didn't any ofyouboys see it or hear it." 
"Aint heard nothing come down here." Luster said. "Heard something hitthat tree up yonder. Dont know which way it went." 
They looked in the branch. 
"Hell. Look along the branch. It came down here. I saw it." 
They looked along the branch. Then they went back up the hill.
"Have you got that ball." the boy said. 
"What I want withit." Luster said."I aint seen no ball." 
The boy got in the water. He wenton. He turned and looked at Luster 
again.He went on down the branch.
The man said "Caddie"up the hill.The boy got out of the water and went 
up the hill.
"Now, just listen at you." Luster said. "Hushup." 
"What he moaningaboutnow." 
"Lawd knows." Luster said. "He just starts like that. He been at itallmorning. Cause ithisbirthday, I reckon." 
"How old he." 
"He thirty three." Luster said."Thirty three this morning." 
"You mean, he been three years old thirty years. 
"I going by what mammy say." Luster said. "I dont know. We going to have 
thirty three candles on a cake, anyway. Little cake. Wont hardly hold them. 
Hush up. Come on back here."He came and caught myarm. "You oldlooney." he said. "You want me towhip you." 
"I bet you will." 
"I is done it. Hush,now." Luster said. "Aint I told youyou cant goup there. 
They'll knock your head clean offwith one of them balls.Come on,here." 
He pulled me back."Sit down." I sat down and he took off my shoesand 
rolled up my trousers. "Now, git in that water and playand see can you 
stop that slobbering and moaning." 
Ihushed and got in the water [...] 
1.1 


 [...]and Roskus came and said to come to supper and Caddy said, 
It's not supper time yet I'm not going. 

She was wet. We were playing in the branchand Caddy squatted down and 
got her dress wet and Versh said, 
"Your mommer going to whip youfor getting your dress wet." 
"She'snot going to do any such thing." Caddy said. 
"How do you know." Quentin said. 
"That's all right how Iknow." Caddy said. "How do youknow." 
"She said she was." Quentin said."Besides, I'm older than you." 
"I'm seven years old." Caddy said."I guess Iknow." 
"I'm older than that." Quentin said. "I go to school. Dont I,Versh." 
"I'm going to school nextyear." Caddy said. "When it comes. Aint I,Versh." 
"You know she whip you when youget your dress wet." Versh said. 
"It's not wet." Caddy said.She stood up in the water and looked at her 
dress. "I'll take it off." she said. "Then it'll dry." 
"I bet you wont." Quentin said. 
"I bet I will." Caddy said. 
"I bet you better not." Quentin said.
Caddy came to Versh and me and turned her back.
"Unbutton it,Versh." she said. 
"Dont you do it,Versh."Quentin said. 
"Taint none of my dress." Versh said. 
"Youunbutton it, Versh." Caddy said. "Or I'll tell Dilsey what you didyesterday." SoVersh unbuttoned it. 
"Youjust take your dress off."Quentin said. Caddy took her dress offand 
threw it on the bank. Then she didn't have on anything but her bodice and 
drawers, and Quentin slapped her and she slipped and fell down in the 
water. When she got up she began to splash water on Quentin, and Quentin 
splashed water on Caddy. Some ofit splashed on Versh and me andVersh 
picked me up and put me on the bank.He said he was going to tell on 
Caddy and Quentin,and then Quentin and Caddy began to splash water at 
Versh. He got behind a bush. 
"I'm going to tell mammy on you all." Versh said. 
Quentin climbed up the bankandtried to catch Versh, butVersh ran away 
and Quentin couldn't. When Quentin came backVersh stopped and 


hollered that he was goingto tell.Caddy told him thatif he wouldn't tell,
they'd let him come back. SoVersh said he wouldn't, and they let him.
"Now I guess you're satisfied." Quentin said."We'll both get whipped now." 
"I dont care." Caddy said. "I'll run away." 
"Yes you will." Quentin said. 
"I'll run away and never come back." Caddy said. I began to cry. 
Caddy turned around and said"Hush" So I hushed. Then they played in the 
branch.Jason was playing too.He was by himselffurther down the branch. 
Versh came around the bushand lifted me down into the water again. 
Caddy was all wet and muddy behind, and I started to cry and she came 
and squatted in the water. 
"Hushnow." she said."I'm not going to run away." So I hushed. Caddy 
smelled like trees in the rain.
19.6

What is the matter with you, Luster said. Cant you get done with that 
moaning and play in the branch like folks. 
Whyn't you take him on home. Didn't they told you not to take him off the 
place.
He still think they own this pasture, Luster said. Cant nobody see down 
here from the house, noways.
We can. And folks dont like to look at a looney. Taint no luck in it. 

1.2Roskus came and said to come to supper and Caddy said it wasn't supper 
time yet.
"Yes tis." Roskus said."Dilsey say for you all to come on to the house.Bringthem on, Versh." He wentup the hill, where the cow was lowing. 
"Maybe we'll be dry by the time we get to the house." Quentin said. 
"It was all your fault." Caddy said. "I hope we do get whipped." She put her 
dress on and Vershbuttoned it.
"They wont know you got wet." Versh said. "It dont show on you. Less me 
and Jason tells." 
"Are you going to tell, Jason." Caddy said. 
"Tell on who."Jason said. 
"He wont tell." Quentin said. "Will you, Jason." 
"I bet he does tell." Caddy said. "He'll tell Damuddy." 


"He cant tell her." Quentin said. "She's sick. If we walk slow it'll be too dark 
for them to see."
"I dont care whether they see or not." Caddy said. "I'm going to tell,myself. 
You carry him up the hill,Versh." 
"Jason wont tell." Quentin said."You remember thatbow and arrow I 
made you, Jason."
"It's broke now." Jason said. 
"Let him tell." Caddy said."I dontgive a cuss. Carry Maury up the hill,
Versh."Versh squatted and I got on hisback. 
19.7

See you all at the show tonight, Luster said. Come on, here. We got to find 
that quarter.

1.3"If we go slow, it'll be dark when we get there." Quentin said. 
"I'm not going slow." Caddy said.We went up the hill, but Quentin didn't 
come. He was down at the branchwhen we got to where we could smell the 
pigs. They were grunting and snuffingin the trough in the comer. Jason 
came behind us, with his hands in his pockets. Roskus was milking the cow 
in the barn door.
10.1

The cows came jumping out of the barn. 

"Go on." T.P. said. "Holler again. Igoing to holler myself. Whooey." 
Quentin kicked T.P. again. He kicked T.P. into the trough where the pigs 
ate and T.P. lay there. "Hot dog." T.P. said."Didn't he get me then. You see 
that white man kick me that time.Whooey." 
I wasn't crying,butI couldn't stop. I wasn't crying,but the ground wasn't 
still, and then I was crying. The ground kept slopingup and the cows ran 
up the hill. T.P. tried to get up. He fell down again and the cows ran down 
the hill. Quentin held my arm andwe went toward the barn. Then the barn 
wasn't there and we had to waituntil it came back. I didn't see it come 
back. It came behind usand Quentin set me down in the trough where the 
cows ate. I held on to it. It was going away too, and I held to it. The cows 
ran down the hillagain,across the door. I couldn't stop. Quentin andT.P. 
came up the hill, fighting. T.P. was falling down the hilland Quentindragged him up the hill.Quentin hit T.P. I couldn't stop. 


"Stand up." Quentin said."Youstay right here. Dont you goawayuntil I get 
back."
"Me andBenjy going back to the wedding." T.P. said. "Whooey." 
Quentin hit T.P.again. Then he began to thump T.P. against the wallT.P. 
was laughing. Every time Quentin thumped him against the wall he tried to 
say Whooey,but he couldn't sayit for laughing. I quit crying, but I couldn't 
stop. T.P. fell on me and the barn door went away. It went down the hilland T.P. was fightingby himselfand he fell down again.He was stilllaughing,and I couldn't stop, andI tried to get upand I fell down, and I 
couldn't stop. Versh said, 
"You sho done itnow. I'll declare if you aint.Shut up that yelling." 

T.P.was still laughing.He flopped on the door and laughed. "Whooey." he 
said. "Me and Benjy going back tothe wedding. Sassprilluh." T.P. said. 
"Hush." Versh said."Where you get it." 
"Out the cellar." T.P. said. "Whooey." 
"Hushup."Versh said. "Where bouts in the cellar." 
"Anywhere." T.P. said. He laughed some more. "Moren a hundred boftleslef. Moren a million. Look out,nigger, I going to holler." 
Quentin said, "Lift him up." 
Versh lifted me up. 
"Drink this, Benjy." Quentin said.The glass was hot."Hush,now."Quentin 
said. "Drinkit." 
"Sassprilluh." T.P.said."Lemme drink it,Mr Quentin." 
"You shut your mouth." Versh said. "Mr Quentin wear you out." 
"Hold him, Versh." Quentin said.
They held me. It was hot on my chin and on my shirt. "Drink." Quentin 
said. They held my head. It was hot inside me, and I began again. I was 
crying now,and something was happeninginside me and I cried more, and 
they held me untilit stopped happening. Then I hushed. It was still goingaround,and then the shapesbegan. Open the crib, Versh. They were goingslow. Spread those empty sacks on the floor. They were going faster, almost 
fast enough. Now. Pick up his feet. They went on, smoothandbright. I 
could hear T.P. laughing. I went on with them,up the bright hill.
1.4 

At the top of the hill Versh put me down. "Come on here, Quentin." he 
called, lookingback down the hill. Quentin was still standing there by the 
branch.He was chunking into the shadows where the branch was. 
"Let the old skizzard stay there." Caddy said. She took my hand andwe 
went on past the barn and through the gate. There was a frog on the brick 
walk, squatting in the middle of it.Caddy stepped over it and pulled me on. 
"Come on, Maury." she said. It still squatted there untilJason pokedat it 
with his toe. 
"He'll make a wart on you."Vershsaid. The frog hopped away. 
"Come on, Maury." Caddy said. 
"They got company tonight." Versh said. 
"How do you know." Caddy said. 
"Withall them lights on." Versh said. "Lightin every window." 
"I reckon we can turn all the lights on without company, if we want to." 
Caddy said. 
"I bet it's company." Versh said. "You all befter go in the back and slipupstairs."
"I dont care." Caddy said. "I'll walk right in the parlor where they are. 
"I bet your pappy whip you if you do." Versh said. 
"I dont care." Caddy said. "I'll walk right in the parlor. I'll walk right in the 
diningroom and eat supper."
"Where you sit."Versh said. 
"I'd sit in Damuddy's chair."Caddy said. "She eatsin bed." 
"I'm hungry. "Jason said. He passed us and ran on up the walk.He had hishandsin his pockets and he fell down. Versh went and picked him up. 
"If you keep them hands out yourpockets, you could stay on your feet." 
Versh said."You cantnever get them out in time to catch yourself, fat as 
you is."
Father was standing by the kitchen steps. 
"Where's Quentin." he said. 
"He comingup the walk." Versh said. Quentin was coming slow.Hisshirt 
was a white blur. 
"Oh." Father said. Light fell down the steps, on him. 
"Caddy and Quentin threw water on each other. " Jason said. 
We waited. 


"They did." Father said. Quentin came, and Father said, "You can eat 
supper in the kitchen tonight."He stooped and took me up,and the light 
came tumbling down the steps on me too, and I could look down at Caddy 
and Jason and Quentin and Versh. Father turned toward the steps. "You 
mustbe quiet, though." he said. 
"Why must we be quiet, Father." Caddy said. "Have we got company. 
"Yes." Father said. 
"I told you they was company."Versh said. 
"You didnot." Caddy said."I was the one that said there was. I said Iwould" 
"Hush." Father said. They hushed and Father opened the door and we 
crossed the back porch and went in to the kitchen. Dilsey was there, and 
Father put me in the chair and closed the apron down and pushed itto the 
table, where supper was. It was steaming up.
"You mind Dilsey, now." Father said. "Dont let them make any more noise 
than they can help, Dilsey." 
"Yes, sir." Dilsey said. Father went away.
"Remember to mind Dilsey, now."he said behindus. I leaned my face over 
where the supper was. It steamed up on my face.
"Let them mind me tonight, Father." Caddy said. 
"I wont." Jason said."I'm going tomind Dilsey." 
"You'll have to, if Father says so."Caddy said. "Let them mind me, Father." 
"I wont." Jason said."I wont mind you." 
"Hush." Father said. "You all mind Caddy, then. When theyare done, bringthem up the back stairs, Dilsey." 
"Yes, sir." Dilsey said. 
"There." Caddy said. "Now I guessyou'll mind me. 
"Youall hush, now." Dilsey said."You got to be quiet tonight." 
"Why do we have to be quiet tonight." Caddy whispered. 
"Never you mind." Dilsey said. "You'll know in the Lawd's own time." She 
broughtmy bowl. The steam from it came and tickled my face. "Come here, 
Versh." Dilsey said. 
"When is the Lawd's own time, Dilsey." Caddy said. 
"It's Sunday." Quentin said. "Dontyou know anything." 
"Shhhhhh." Dilsey said. "Didn't Mr Jason say for you all tobe quiet.Eat 


your supper, now.Here, Versh. Git his spoon."Versh's hand came with the 
spoon, into the bowl. The spoon came up to my mouth. The steam tickledinto my mouth. Then we quit eating and we looked at each other andwe 
were quiet, and then we heard it again and I began to cry. 
"What was that." Caddy said. She put her hand on my hand. 
"That was Mother." Quentin said.The spoon came upand I ate, then I 
cried again.
"Hush." Caddy said. But I didn't hush and she came and put her arms 
around me. Dilsey went and closed both the doors and then we couldn't 
hear it.
"Hush,now."Caddy said. I hushed and ate. Quentin wasn't eating,but 
Jason was.
"That was Mother." Quentin said.He got up. 
"You set right down." Dilsey said. "They got companyin there, and you inthem muddy clothes. You set down too, Caddy, and get done eating." 
"She was crying." Quentin said. 
"It was somebody singing." Caddysaid. "Wasn't it, Dilsey." 
"Youall eat your supper, now, like Mr Jason said." Dilsey said."You'llknow in the Lawd's own time." Caddy went back to her chair. 
"I told you it was a party." she said. 
Versh said,"He done et all that." 
"Bring his bowl here." Dilsey said. The bowl went away. 
"Dilsey." Caddy said. "Quentin's not eating his supper. Hasn't he gotto 
mind me."
"Eatyour supper, Quentin." Dilsey said. "You all got to get done andget 
out of mykitchen."
"I dont want any more supper. Quentin said. 
"You've got to eat if Isay you have." Caddy said. "Hasn't he, Dilsey."The 
bowl steamed up to myface, and Versh's hand dipped the spoon in itand 
the steam tickled intomy mouth.
"I dont want any more."Quentin said. "How can they have a party when 
Damuddy's sick." 
"They'll have it down stairs." Caddy said. "She can come to the landing and 
see it. That's what I'm going to do when I get my nightie on. 
"Mother was crying. " Quentin said. "Wasn't she crying, Dilsey." 


"Dont you come pesteringat me, boy." Dilseysaid."I got to get supper for 
all them folks soon as youall get done eating." 
After a while even Jason was through eating, and he began to cry. 
"Now you got to tune up." Dilsey said. 
"He does it every night since Damuddy was sickand he cant sleep with 
her." Caddy said."Crybaby." 
"I'm going to tell on you."Jason said. 
He was crying. "You've already told." Caddy said."There's not anythingelse you can tell, now." 
"Youall needs to go to bed." Dilsey said. She came and lifted me down and 
wiped my face and hands with a warm cloth. "Versh, can you get them up 
the back stairs quiet. You,Jason, shut up that crying." 
"It's too early to go to bed now." Caddy said. "We dont ever have to go to 
bed this early." 
"Youis tonight." Dilsey said."Your paw say for you to come right on up 
stairs when you et supper. You heard him." 
"He said to mind me. " Caddy said. 
"I'm not going to mind you." Jason said. 
"You have to." Caddy said. "Come on, now. You have to do like I say. 
"Make them be quiet, Versh." Dilsey said. "You all going tobe quiet,aint 
you.
"What do we have to be so quiet for, tonight." Caddy said. 
"Your mommer aint feeling well."Dilsey said. "You all go on with Versh, 
now."
"I told you Mother was crying. "Quentin said. Versh took me up andopened the door onto the back porch. We went out andVersh closed the 
door black. I could smell Versh and feel him. You allbe quiet,now.We're 
not going up stairs yet. Mr Jason said for you to come right up stairs. He 
said to mind me. I'm not going tomind you. But he said for all ofusto. 
Didn't he, Quentin. I could feel Versh's head. I could hear us. Didn't he, 
Versh. Yes, that right. Then I say for us to go out doors a while. Come on. 
Versh opened the door and we went out.
We went down the steps.
"I expect we'd better go down to Versh's house, so we'll be quiet." Caddy 
said. Versh put me down and Caddy took my hand and we went down the 


brick walk.
"Come on." Caddy said."That frog's gone. He's hopped way over to the 
garden, bynow. Maybe we'll see another one." Roskus came with the milkbuckets.He went on. Quentin wasn't coming with us. He wassittingon the 
kitchen steps. We went down toVersh's house. I liked to smell Versh'shouse. [...]
13.1 
[...]There was a fire in it and T.P. squatting in his shirt tail in front of it, 
chunking it into a blaze. 

15.1Then I got up and T.P. dressed me and we went to the kitchen and ate. 
Dilsey was singingand Ibegan to cry and she stopped. 
"Keep him awayfrom the house, now." Dilsey said. 
"We cant go that way." T.P. said. 
We played in the branch.
"We cant go around yonder." T.P.said. "Dont you know mammy saywe 
cant."
Dilsey was singingin the kitchen and I began to cry. 
"Hush." T.P. said. "Come on. Les go down to the barn." Roskus wasmilkingat the barn. He wasmilking with one hand, and groaning. Some birds sat 
on the barn door and watched him. One of them came down and ate with 
the cows. I watched Roskus milk while T.P. was feeding Queenie and 
Prince. The calf was in the pig pen. It nuzzled at the wire, bawling. 
"T.P." Roskus said. T.P. said Sir,in the barn. Fancy held her head over the 
door, because T.P. hadn't fed her yet. "Git done there." Roskus said. "You 
got to do this milking. I cantuse my right hand no more." 

T.P.came and milked.
"Whyn't you get the doctor." T.P. said. 
"Doctor cant do no good." Roskussaid. "Not on this place." 
"What wrong with this place." T.P. said. 
"Taint no luck on this place." Roskus said. "Turn that calf in ifyou done." 
2.1
Taint no luck on this place, Roskus said. The fire rose and fell behind himand Versh, sliding on his and Versh's face. Dilsey finished putting me to 
bed. The bed smelled like T.P. I liked it. 


13.2"What you know aboutit." Dilsey said. "What trance you been in." 
"Dontneed no trance."Roskus said. "Aint the sign of it laying right there 
on thatbed. Aint the sign of itbeen here for folks to see fifteen yearsnow. 
"Spose it is." Dilsey said."It aint hurt none of you and yourn,is it.Versh 
working and Frony married off your hands and T.P. gettingbig enough to 
take your place when rheumatism finish getting you." 
"They been two,now." Roskus said. "Coing to be one more. I seen the sign, 
and you is too."
"I heard a squinch owl thatnight." T.P. said. "Dan wouldn't come and get 
his supper, neither. Wouldn't come nocloser than the barn. Begun howlingright after dark. Versh heard him." 
"Going tobe more than one more." Dilsey said. "Show me the man what 
aint going to die, blessJesus." 
"Dying aintall." Roskus said. 
"I knows what you thinking." Dilsey said. "And they aint going to be no 
luck in saying thatname, lessen you going to set up with him while he 
cries."
"They aint no luck on this place."Roskus said. "I seen it at first butwhen 
they changed hisname I knowed it." 
"Hush your mouth." Dilsey said. She pulled the covers up. It smelled like 

T.P. "Youall shut upnow, till he get to sleep." 
"I seen the sign." Roskus said. 
"Sign T.P. got to do all your work for you." Dilsey said. [...] 
15.2 
[...]Take him and Quentin down to the house and let them play withLuster, where Frony can watch them, T.P., and go and help your paw.
We finished eating. T.P. tookQuentin up and we went down to T.P.'shouse. Luster was playing in the dirt. T.P. put Quentin down and she 
played in the dirt too. Luster had some spoolsand he and Quentin fought 
and Quentin had the spools. Luster cried and Frony came and gave Luster 
a tin can to play with, and then I had the spools and Quentin foughtme 
and I cried. "Hush." Fronysaid."Aint you shamed of yourself. Taking a 
baby's play pretty."She took the spools from me and gave them back to 
Quentin. 


"Hush,now." Frony said. "Hush, Itell you. 
"Hushup." Frony said. "You needs whipping, that's what youneeds."She 
took Luster and Quentin up."Come on here." she said. We went to the 
barn. T.P. was milking the cow. Roskus was sitting on the box. 
"What's the matter withhim now." Roskus said. 
"You have to keep him down here." Frony said. "He fighting these babies 
again. Taking they play things.Stay here with T.P. now, and see can you 
husha while." 
"Clean thatudder good now." Roskus said. "You milked that young cow dry 
last winter. If you milk this one dry, they aint going to be no more milk." 
Dilsey was singing.
"Not around yonder." T.P. said."Dont you know mammy say you cant go 
around there."
They were singing. 
"Come on." T.P. said. "Les go playwith Quentin and Luster. Come on. 
Quentin and Luster were playing in the dirt in front of T.P.'s house.There 
was a fire in the house, risingand falling, with Roskussittingblack against 
it.
"That's three, thank the Lawd." Roskus said."I told you two years ago. 
They aintno luck on this place." 
"Whyn't you get out, then." Dilseysaid. She was undressing me. "Your bad 
luck talk got them Memphisnotions into Versh. That ought tosatisfy you. 
"If thatall the bad luck Versh have." Roskus said. 
Frony came in.
"Youall done." Dilsey said. 
"T.P. finishingup." Frony said. "Miss Cabline want you to put Quentin to 
bed."
"I'm coming just as fastas I can."Dilsey said. "She ought toknowby this 
time I aint got no wings." 
"That's what I tell you." Roskus said. "They aint no luck goingbe on no 
place where one of they own chillen's name aint never spoke." 
"Hush." Dilseysaid."Do you wantto get him started." 
"Raising a child not to know its own mammy's name."Roskus said. 
"Dont youbother your head abouther." Dilsey said. "I raised all of them 
and I reckon I can raise one more. Hush, now. Let him get to sleep if he 


will."
"Saying aname." Fronysaid."He dont knownobody's name." 
"Youjust sayit and see if he dont."Dilsey said. "You sayit to him while he 
sleeping and I bet he hear you.
"He know lot more than folks thinks." Roskus said. "He knowed they timewas coming, like that pointer done. He could tell you when hisn coming, ifhe could talk. Or yours.Or mine."
"You take Luster outen thatbed, mammy." Frony said. "Thatboy conjure 
him."
"Hush your mouth." Dilsey said. "Aint you gotno better sense than that. 
What you want to listen to Roskusfor, anyway. Getin, Benjy." 
Dilsey pushed me and I got in the bed, where Luster already was. He was 
asleep. Dilsey took a long piece ofwood and laid itbetween Luster and me. 
"Stay on your side now." Dilsey said. "Luster little, and you dont want to 
hurt him." 
16.1

You cant go yet, T.P. said. Wait.

We looked around the corner of the house and watched the carriages go 
away.
"Now." T.P. said. He took Quentin up and we ran down to the corner of the 
fence and watched them pass."There he go." T.P. said. "See that one with 
the glass in it.Lookat him.He laying in there. See him." 
19.8

Come on, Luster said, I going to take this here ball down home, where I 
wont lose it. Naw, sir, you cant have it. If them men sees you with it, 
they'll say you stole it. Hush up, now. You cant have it. What business you 
got with it. You cant play no ball.

1.5Frony and T.P. were playing in the dirt by the door. T.P. had lightning bugs 
in abottle.
"How did you all get back out." Frony said. 
"We've got company."Caddy said. "Father said for us to mind me tonight. I 
expect you and T.P. will have to mind me too." 
"I'm not going to mind you." Jason said. "Fronyand T.P. dont have to 
either.""They willif I say so." Caddy said. "Maybe I wont say for them to." 


"T.P. dont mindnobody." Frony said. "Is they started the funeral yet." 
"What's afuneral."Jason said. 
"Didn't mammy tell you not to tellthem." Versh said. 
"Where they moans." Frony said. "They moaned two days on Sis Beulah 
Clay."
18.1

They moaned at Dilsey's house. Dilsey was moaning. When Dilsey 
moaned Luster said, Hush, and we hushed, and then I began to cry and 
Blue howled under the kitchen steps. Then Dilsey stopped and we stopped. 

1.6"Oh." Caddy said. "That's niggers. White folks donthave funerals." 
"Mammy said usnot to tell them,Frony."Versh said. 
"Tell them what." Caddy said. 
18.2

Dilsey moaned, and when it got to the place I began to cry and Blue 
howled under the steps. Luster, Frony said in the window. Take them 
down to the barn. I cant get no cooking done with all that racket. That 
hound too. Get them outen here.
I aint going down there, Luster said. I might meet pappy down there. I 
seen him last night, waving his arms in the barn. 

1.7"I like to know why not." Frony said. "White folks dies too. Yourgrandmammy dead as anynigger can get, I reckon."
"Dogs are dead." Caddy said. "And when Nancy fell in the ditch andRoskus 
shot her and the buzzards came and undressed her."
15.3The bones rounded out of the ditch, where the dark vines were in the black 
ditch, into the moonlight, like some of the shapes had stopped. Then they 
all stopped and it was dark,and when I stopped to start again I could hear 
Mother, and feet walking fast away, and I could smell it. Then the room 
came, butmy eyes went shut. I didn't stop. I could smell it. T.P.unpinnedthe bed clothes. 
"Hush." he said. "Shhhhhhhh." 
But I could smell it. T.P. pulled me up and he put on my clothes fast. 
"Hush,Benjy."he said."We goingdown to our house. You want to go down 


to our house, where Frony is. Hush. Shhhhh."
He laced my shoes and put my cap on and we went out. There was a light inthe hall. Across the hall we could hear Mother. 
"Shhhhhh,Benjy." T.P. said. "We'll be out in a minute." A door opened and 
I could smell it more than ever, and a head came out. It wasn't Father. 
Father was sick there.
"Can you take him out of the house." 
"That's where we going." T.P.said. Dilsey came up the stairs. 
"Hush." she said. "Hush. Take him down home, T.P. Frony fixing him a 
bed. You all lookafter him,now. Hush, Benjy. Go on with T.P." 
She went where we could hear Mother. 
"Better keep him there." It wasn't Father. He shut the door, but I could stillsmell it.
We went down stairs. The stairs went down into the dark and T.P. took myhand, and we went out the door, out of the dark. Dan was sitting in the 
back yard, howling. 
"He smell it." T.P. said. "Is that the way you found it out." 
We went down the steps, where our shadows were.
"I forgot your coat." T.P. said. "You ought to had it.But I aint goingback." 
Dan howled.
"Hushnow." T.P.said.Our shadows moved, but Dan's shadow didn't move 
except to howl when he did.
"I cant take you down home,bellering like youis." T.P. said. "You was bad 
enoughbefore you got thatbullfrog voice. Come on." 
We went along the brick walk, with our shadows. The pig pen smelled like 
pigs. The cow stood in the lot, chewing atus. Dan howled. 
"You going to wake the whole town up." T.P. said. "Cant you hush."We saw 
Fancy, eatingby the branch. The moon shone on the water when we got 
there.
"Naw, sir." T.P. said. "This too close. We cant stop here. Come on. Now, 
just look at you. Got your whole leg wet. Come on, here." Dan howled. 
The ditch came up out of the buzzing grass. The bones rounded out of the 
black vines. 
"Now." T.P. said. "BelIer your head off if you want to. You got the wholenightand a twenty acre pasture tobelIer in." 


T.P. lay down in the ditch and I sat down, watching the bones where the 
buzzards ate Nancy, flapping hlack and slow and heavy out of the ditch. 
19.9
I had it when we was down here before, Luster said. I showed it to you. 
Didn't you see it. I took it out of my pocket right here and showed it to 
you.

1.8"Do you thinkbuzzards are going to undress Damuddy."Caddy said. 
"You're crazy." 
"You're a skizzard." Jason said. He began to cry. 
"You're a knobnut." Caddy said.Jason cried. His hands were in his pockets. 
"Jason going to be rich man." Versh said. "He holdinghis money all the 
time."
Jason cried.
"Now you've got him started." Caddy said. "Hush up,Jason.How can 
buzzards get in where Damuddy is. Father wouldn't let them. Wouldyou 
let a buzzard undress you. Hushup, now."
Jason hushed. "Frony said it was a funeral." he said. 
"Well it's not." Caddy said. "It's a party. Frony dont know anythingabout 
it. He wants your lightning bugs, T.P. Let him hold it a while." 

T.P.gave me the bottle of lightning bugs. 
"I bet if we go around to the parlor window we can see something." Caddy 
said. "Then you'll believe me." 
"I already knows." Frony said. "I dont need to see.
"Youbetter hush your mouth, Frony."Versh said. "Mammy going whipyou."
"Whatis it." Caddy said.
"I knows what I knows." Frony said. 
"Come on." Caddy said."Let's go around to the front." 
We started to go.
"T P. wants his lightning bugs." Frony said. 
"Let him hold ita while longer, T.P." Caddy said. "We'll bring itback." 
"Youall never caught them." Frony said. 
"If I say youand T.P. can come too, will you let him hold it." Caddy said. 
"Aint nobody said me and T.P. gotto mind you." Frony said. 

"If I say you dont have to, will youlet him hold it."Caddy said. "All right." 
Frony said. "Let him holdit, T.P.We going to watch them moaning." 
"They aint moaning." Caddy said."I tell you it'sa party. Are they moaning, 
Versh."
"We aint going to know what theydoing, standing here." Versh said. 
"Come on." Caddy said."Frony and T.P. dont have to mind me. But the restof us do. You better carry him, Versh. It's getting dark."
Versh took me upand we went on around the kitchen. 
10.2

When we looked around the corner we could see the lights coming up the 
drive. T.P. went back to the cellar door and opened it. 
You know what's down there, T.P. said. Soda water. I seen Mr Jason 
come up with both hands full of them. Wait here a minute. 

T.P.went and looked in the kitchen door. Dilsey said, What are you 
peeping in here for. Where's Benjy. 
He out here, T.P. said. 
Go on and watch him, Dilsey said. Keep him out the house now. 
Yessum, T.P. said. Is they started yet.
You go on and keep that boy out of sight, Dilsey said. I got all I can tend 
to.
1.9A snake crawled out from under the house. Jason said he wasn't afraid of 
snakes and Caddy said he wasbutshe wasn't and Versh said they both 
were and Caddy said to be quiet, like Father said. 
10.3

You aint got to start bellering now, T.P. said. You want some this 
sassprilluh. 
It tickled my nose and eyes.
If you aint going to drink it, let me get to it, T.P. said. All right, here tis. 
We better get another bottle while aint nobody bothering us. You be quiet, 
now.

We stopped under the tree by the parlor window. Versh set me downin the 
wet grass. It was cold. There were lights in all the windows. 
1.10 


"That's where Damuddy is." Caddy said. "She's sick every day now. When 
she gets well we're going to have apicnic." 
"I knows what I knows." Frony said. 
The trees were buzzing,and the grass. 
"The one next toit is where we have the measles." Caddy said. "Where do 
you and T.P. have the measles, Frony."
"Has them just wherever we is, I reckon." Frony said. 
"They haven't started yet." Caddy said. 
10.4

They getting ready to start, T.P. said. You stand right here now while Iget that box so we can see in the window. Here, les finish drinking thishere sassprilluh. It make me feel just like a squinch owl inside. 

We drank the sassprilluh and T.P.pushed the bottle through the lattice, 
under the house,and went away. Icould hear them in the parlor and I 
clawed my hands against the wall.T.P. dragged the box. He fell down, and 
he began to laugh. He lay there, laughing into the grass. He gotup and 
dragged the box under the window, tryingnot to laugh. 
"I skeered I going to holler." T.P. said. "Git on the box and see is they 
started."
1.11"They haven't started because the band hasn't come yet." Caddy said. 
"They aint going to have no band." Frony said. 
"How do you know." Caddy said. 
"I knows what I knows." Frony said. 
"You dont know anything."Caddysaid. She went to the tree. "Pushme up, 
Versh."
"Your paw told you to stay out that tree." Versh said. 
"That wasa long time ago." Caddysaid. "I expect he's forgotten aboutit. 
Besides, he said to mind me tonight. Didn't he didn't he say to mind me 
tonight."
"I'm not going to mind you." Jason said. "Fronyand T.P.are not going to 
either."
"Push me up, Versh."Caddy said. 
"All right." Versh said. "You the one going to get whipped. I aint."He went 
and pushed Caddy up into the tree to the first limb. We watched the muddy 


bottom ofher drawers. Then we couldn't see her. We could hear the tree 
thrashing.
"Mr Jason said if youbreak that tree he whip you."Versh said. 
"I'm going to tell on her too."Jason said. 
The tree quit thrashing. We looked up into the still branches. 
"What you seeing." Frony whispered. 
10.5

I saw them. Then I saw Caddy, with flowers in her hair, and a long veillike shining wind. Caddy Caddy 

"Hush." T.P. said. "They going to hear you. Get down quick." He pulled me. 
Caddy. I clawedmy hands againstthe wall Caddy. T.P. pulled me. "Hush." 
he said. "Hush. Come on here quick." He pulled me on. Caddy "Hushup, 
Benjy. You want them to hear you. Come on, les drinksome more 
sassprilluh, then we can come back if you hush. We better get one more 
bottle or we both be hollering. We can say Dan drankit. Mr Quentin always 
saying he so smart, we can say he sassprilluh dog, too." 
The moonlight came down the cellar stairs. We drank some more 
sassprilluh.
"You know what I wish." T.P. said. "I wish abear would walk in thatcellar 
door. You know what I do. I walk right up to him and spitin he eye.Gimme 
that bottle to stop mymouth before I holler." 

T.P.fell down. He began to laugh,and the cellar door and the moonlight 
jumped away and somethinghit me. 
"Hushup." T.P. said, tryingnot tolaugh."Lawd, they'll all hear us.Get up." 
T.P.said. "Get up,Benjy, quick."He was thrashing aboutand laughing and 
I tried to get up. The cellar steps ran up the hill in the moonlight andT.P. 
fell up the hill, into the moonlight, and I ran against the fence and T.P. ran 
behind me saying"Hush up hushup." Then he fell into the flowers, 
laughing,and I ran into the box. But when I tried to climb ontoit it jumped 
away and hit me on the back of the head and my throatmade a sound. Itmade the sound again and I stopped trying to get up, and it made the 
sound again and I began to cry. But my throat kept on making the sound 
while T.P. was pulling me. It kepton making it and I couldn't tell if Iwas 
crying or not, and T.P. fell down on top of me, laughing,and it kepton 
making the soundand Quentin kicked T.P. and Caddy put her armsaround 

me, and her shining veil, and I couldn't smell trees anymore and I began to 
cry.
6.1

Benjy, Caddy said, Benjy. She put her arms around me again, but I went 
away. "What isit, Benjy." she said. "Is it this hat."She took her hat off and 
came again, and I went away. 
"Benjy." she said. "What isit, Benjy. What hasCaddy done." 
"He dont like that prissy dress." Jason said. "You think you're grown up, 
dont you. You thinkyou're better than anybody else, dont you. Prissy." 
"You shut your mouth." Caddy said. "You dirty little beast. Benjy." 
"Just because you are fourteen, you think you're grown up, dont you." 
Jason said. "You think you're something. Dont you." 
"Hush,Benjy."Caddy said. "You'll disturbMother. Hush." 
But I didn't hush,and when she went away I followed, and she stopped on 
the stairs and waited and I stopped too. 
"Whatis it, Benjy." Caddy said."Tell Caddy. She'll do it. Try." 
"Candace." Mother said. 
"Yessum." Caddy said. 
"Why are you teasing him."Mother said. "Bring him here." 
We went to Mother's room, where she was lying with the sickness on a 
cloth on her head.
"Whatis the matter now." Mothersaid. "Benjamin.
"Benjy." Caddy said. She came again,but I wentaway. 
"You must have done something to him." Mother said."Why wontyou lethim alone, so I can have some peace. Give him the box and please go on 
and let him alone."
Caddy got the boxand set it on the floor and opened it. It was full of stars. 
When I was still, they were still. When I moved, they glinted and sparkled. 
I hushed.
Then I heard Caddy walking and I began again.
"Benjamin." Mother said. "Come here." I went to the door. "You, 
Benjamin." Mother said. 
"Whatis itnow." Father said. "Where are you going." 
"Take him downstairs and get someone to watch him,Jason." Mother said. 
"You know I'm ill, yet you " 


Father shut the door behind us. 
"T.P." he said. 
"Sir." T.P. said downstairs. 
"Benjy's coming down." Father said. "Go with T.P." 
I went to the bathroom door. I could hear the water. 
"Benjy." T.P. said downstairs. 
I could hear the water. I listened to it. 
"Benjy." T.P. said downstairs.I listened to the water. 
I couldn't hear the water, and Caddy opened the door.
"Why, Benjy." she said. She looked at me and I went and she put herarms 
around me."Did you find Caddy again." she said. "Did you think Caddy 
had run away." Caddy smelled like trees. 
We went to Caddy's room. She satdown at the mirror. She stopped her 
hands and looked at me.
"Why, Benjy. What is it." she said. "You mustn't cry. Caddy's not going 
away. See here." she said. She took up the bottle and took the stopper out 
and held it to mynose. "Sweet. Smell. Good." 
I went away and I didn't hush, and she held the bottle in her hand, looking 
at me.
"Oh." she said. She put the bottle down and came and put her arms around 
me. "So that wasit. And you were trying to tell Caddy and you couldn't tellher. You wanted to, but you couldn't, could you.Of course Caddy wont. Of 
course Caddy wont. Just wait till Idress."
Caddy dressed and took up the bottle again and we went down to the 
kitchen.
"Dilsey." Caddy said. "Benjy's gota present for you." She stooped down and 
pot the bottle in my hand. "Hold it out to Dilsey,now." Caddy held my 
hand out and Dilsey took the bottle.
"Well I'll declare." Dilsey said. "Ifmy babyaint give Dilseya bottle of 
perfume. Just look here, Roskus." 
Caddy smelled like trees. "We dont like perfume ourselves."Caddy said. 
1.12

She smelled like trees. 

8.1 


"Come on, now." Dilsey said. "Youtoo big to sleep with folks. You abig boy 
now. Thirteen years old. Big enough to sleep by yourselfin Uncle Maury'sroom." Dilsey said.Uncle Maury was sick.His eye was sick,and hismouth. 
Versh took his supper up to him on the tray. 
"Maury says he's going to shoot the scoundrel." Father said. "I told himhe'd better not mention it to Patterson before hand." He drank. 
"Jason." Mother said.
"Shoot who, Father."Quentin said. "What's Uncle Maury going to shoot 
him for."
"Because he couldn't take a little joke." Father said. 
"Jason." Mother said. "How can you. You'd sit right there and see Maury 
shot down in ambush, and laugh." 
"Then Maury'd better stay out of ambush." Father said. 
"Shoot who, Father."Quentin said. "Who's Uncle Maury going toshoot." 
"Nobody." Father said. "I dont own a pistol." Mother began to cry. "If youbegrudge Maury your food, whyaren't you man enough tosay so to hisface. To ridicule him before the children, behind hisback." 
"Of course I dont." Father said."I admire Maury. He isinvaluable tomy 
own sense of racial superiority. I wouldn't swap Maury for amatched team. 
And do you know why, Quentin." 
"No, sir."Quentin said. 
"Et ego in arcadia I have forgotten the latin for hay." Father said. "There, 
there." he said. "I was just joking." He drank and set the glass down and 
went and puthis hand on Mother's shoulder. 
"It's no joke." Mother said. "My people are every bit as well born as yours. 
Justbecause Maury's health isbad. 
"Of course." Father said. "Bad health is the primary reason for all life. 
Created by disease, within putrefaction, into decay. Versh." 
"Sir." Versh saidbehind my chair. 
"Take the decanter and fill it." 
"And tell Dilsey to come and take Benjamin up to bed." Mother said. 
"Youa big boy." Dilsey said. "Caddy tired sleeping with you. Hushnow, so 
you can go to sleep." The room went away,but I didn't hush, and the room 
came backand Dilsey came and sat on the bed, looking atme. 
"Aint you going tobe a good boyand hush." Dilsey said. "You aint, is you. 


Sec can you waita minute, then."She went away. There wasn't anythinginthe door. Then Caddy was init. 
"Hush." Caddy said. "I'm coming." 
I hushed and Dilsey turned back the spread and Caddy got in between the 
spread and the blanket. She didn't take off her bathrobe. 
"Now." she said. "Here I am." Dilsey came with a blanket and spreadit over 
her and tucked it around her.
"He be gone in a minute." Dilsey said. "I leave the light on in your room. 
"All right." Caddy said. She snuggled her head beside mine on the pillow. 
"Goodnight, Dilsey."
"Goodnight,honey." Dilseysaid. The room went black. Caddy smelled like 
trees.

1.13We looked up into the tree where she was.
"What she seeing,Versh." Frony whispered. 
"Shhhhhhh." Caddy said in the tree. Dilsey said,"You come on here." She 
came around the corner of the house. "Whyn't you all go on up stairs,like 
your paw said, stead of slipping out behind my back. Where's Caddy and 
Quentin." 
"I told her not to climbup that tree." Jason said. "I'm going to tell on her. 
"Who in what tree." Dilsey said. She came and looked up into the tree. 
"Caddy." Dilsey said. The branches began toshake again.
"You,Satan." Dilseysaid."Come down from there." 
"Hush." Caddy said, "Dont you know Father said to be quiet."Her legs 
came in sight and Dilsey reached up and lifted her out of the tree. 
"Aint you got anybetter sense than to let them come around here." Dilsey 
said. "I couldn't do nothing with her." Versh said. 
"What you all doing here." Dilsey said. "Who told you to come up to the 
house."
"She did." Frony said. "She told usto come." 
"Who told you you got to do whatshe say." Dilsey said. "Get on home, 
now.' Frony andT.P. went on. We couldn't see them when they were still 
goingaway.
"Out here in the middle of the night." Dilsey said.She took me up and we 
went to the kitchen."Slipping outbehind my back." Dilsey said. "When you 


knowed it's past your bedtime." 
"Shhhh, Dilsey." Caddy said."Dont talk so loud. We've got to be quiet." 
"You hushyour mouth and get quiet, then." Dilsey said."Where's 
Quentin."
"Quentin's mad because we had to mind me tonight." Caddy said. "He's 
still got T.P.'s bottle of lightningbugs." 
"I reckon T.P. can getalong without it." Dilsey said. "You goand find 
Quentin, Versh. Roskus say he seen him going towards the barn."Versh 
went on. We couldn't see him.
"They're not doing anything in there." Caddy said. "Just sitting in chairs 
and looking."
"They dont need no help from youall to do that." Dilsey said. We went 
around the kitchen. 
19.10

Where you want to go now, Luster said. You going back to watch them 
knocking ball again. We done looked for it over there. Here. Wait a 
minute. You wait right here while I go back and get that ball. I done 
thought of something. 

7.1The kitchen was dark. The trees were black on the sky. Dan came waddlingout from under the steps and chewed my ankle. I went around the kitchen, 
where the moon was. Dan came scufflingalong,into the moon."Benjy." 

T.P.said in the house. 
The flower tree by the parlor window wasn't dark, but the thick treeswere. 
The grass was buzzing in the moonlight where my shadow walked on the 
grass.
"You,Benjy." T.P.saidin the house. "Where you hiding. You slipping off. I 
knows it." 
19.11
Luster came back. Wait, he said. Here. Dont go over there. Miss Quentinand her beau in the swing yonder. You come on this way. Come back here, 
Benjy.

7.2It was dark under the trees. Dan wouldn't come. He stayed in the 
moonlight. Then I could see the swing and I began to cry. 


19.12

Come away from there, Benjy, Luster said. You know Miss Quentin goingto get mad.

7.3It was two now, and then one in the swing. Caddy came fast, white in the 
darkness.
"Benjy." she said. "How did you slip out. Where's Versh."
She put her armsaround me and I hushed and held to her dress and tried 
to pull her away.
"Why, Benjy." she said. "What is it. T.P." she called. The one in the swinggot up and came, and Icried and pulled Caddy's dress. 
"Benjy." Caddy said. "It's just Charlie. Dont you know Charlie." 
"Where's his nigger." Charlie said."What do they let him run around loose 
for."
"Hush,Benjy."Caddy said. "Go away, Charlie.He doesn't like you."Charliewent away and I hushed. I pulled at Caddy's dress. 
"Why, Benjy." Caddy said. "Aren't you going to let me stayhere and talk to 
Charlie a while." 
"Call that nigger." Charlie said.He came back. I cried louder and pulled at 
Caddy's dress.
"Goaway, Charlie." Caddy said. Charlie came and put his hands on Caddy 
and I cried more. I cried loud. 
"No, no." Caddy said. "No. No." 
"He cant talk." Charlie said."Caddy." 
"Are you crazy." Caddy said.She began to breathe fast."He can see. Dont. 
Dont." Caddy fought. They bothbreathed fast. "Please. Please." Caddy 
whispered.
"Send him away." Charlie said. 
"I will." Caddy said."Let me go." 
"Will you send him away." Charlie said. 
"Yes." Caddy said."Let me go." Charlie went away."Hush." Caddy said. 
"He's gone." I hushed. I could hear her and feel her chest going. 
"I'll have to take him to the house." she said. She took my hand. "I'mcoming." she whispered. 
"Wait." Charlie said. "Call the nigger." 


"No." Caddy said."I'll come back.Come on, Benjy." 
"Caddy."Charlie whispered, loud. We went on. "You better come back. Are 
you comingback." Caddy and I were running."Caddy."Charlie said.We 
ran outinto the moonlight, toward the kitchen. 
"Caddy."Charlie said.
Caddy and I ran. We ran up the kitchen steps, onto the porch, and Caddyknelt down in the dark and held me. I could hear her and feel her chest. "I 
wont." she said. "I wont anymore,ever. Benjy. Benjy.' Then she was crying, 
and I cried, and we held each other. "Hush." She said. "Hush. I wont 
anymore. So I hushed and Caddy got up and we went into the kitchen and 
turned the light on and Caddy took the kitchen soap and washed her 
mouthat the sink, hard. Caddy smelled like trees. 
19.13

I kept a telling you to stay away from there, Luster said. They sat up inthe swing, quick. Quentin had her hands on her hair. He had a red tie.
You old crazy loon, Quentin said. I'm going to tell Dilsey about the way 
you let him follow everywhere I go. I'm going to make her whip you good. 

"I couldn't stop him." Luster said."Come on here, Benjy." 
"Yes you could." Quentin said."You didn't try. You were both snoopingaroundafter me. Did Grandmother send you all out here to spy on me." 
She jumped out of the swing."If you dont take him right away thisminute 
and keep him away, I'm going tomake Jason whip you." 
"I cant donothing with him." Luster said. "You tryit if you think you can." 
"Shut your mouth."Quentin said. "Are you going to get him away." 
"Ah, let him stay." he said. He hada red tie. The sun was red on it."Look 
here, Jack."He struck a match and put it in hismouth. Then he took the 
match out of hismouth. It was still burning. "Want to try it." he said.I 
went over there. "Open your mouth." he said. I opened my mouth. Quentinhit the match with her hand and itwent away. 
"Goddam you." Quentin said."Doyou want to get him started. DontYou 
know he'll beller all day. I'm goingto tell Dilsey on you."She went away 
running.
"Here, kid." he said."Hey. Come on back. I aint going to fool with him." 
Quentin ran on to the house. She went around the kitchen. 
"You played hell then, Jack." he said. "Aint you." 


"He cant tell what yousaying." Luster said. "He deef and dumb." 
"Is."he said."How long's he been that way." 
"Been that way thirty three years today." Luster said. "Born looney. Is you 
one of them show folks." 
"Why." he said. 
"I dont ricklickseeing you aroundhere before." Luster said. 
"Well, what aboutit." he said. 
"Nothing." Luster said."I going tonight." 
He looked at me.
"Youaint the one can play a tune on that saw, is you." Luster said. 
"It'll cost you a quarter to find that out." he said.He looked at me. "Why 
dont they lock him up."he said."What'd you bring him out here for." 
"Youaint talking tome." Luster said. "I cant donothing with him. Ijust 
come over here looking for a quarter I lost so I can go to the show tonight. 
Look like now I aint going to get to go." Luster looked on the ground."You 
aint got no extra quarter, is you."Luster said. 
"No." he said. "Iaint." 
"I reckon I just have to find that other one, then." Luster said.He put hishand in his pocket. "You dont want to buyno golfballneither, does you." 
Luster said. 
"What kind ofball." he said. 
"Golf ball." Luster said. "I dont want but a quarter." 
"What for." he said. "What do I want with it." 
"I didn't think you did." Luster said. "Come on here, mulehead." He said. 
"Come on here and watch them knocking that ball. Here. Here somethingyou can play withalong with thatjimson weed." Luster picked it up and 
gave itto me. It was bright.
"Where'd you get that." he said. His tie was red in the sun, walking. 
"Found itunder this here bush." Luster said."I thought for a minute it was 
that quarter I lost."He came and took it. 
"Hush." Luster said. "He going togive it back when he done lookingat it." 
"Agnes Mabel Becky." he said.He looked toward the house. 
"Hush." Luster said. "He fixing togive it back." 
He gave it to me and I hushed.
"Who come to see her last night."he said. 


"I dont know." Luster said."Theycomes every night she can climb down 
that tree. I dont keep no track of them."
"Damn if one of them didn't leave a track." he said. He looked at the house. 
Then he went and lay down in the swing. 
"Goaway." he said. "Dont botherme." 
"Come on here." Luster said."Youdone played hell now. Time Miss 
Quentin get done telling on you."
We went to the fence and looked through the curling flower spaces.Luster 
hunted in the grass. 
"I had it right here." he said. I saw the flag flapping,and the sun slantingon the broad grass.
"They'll be some along soon." Luster said. "There some now, but they goingaway. Come on and help me look for it." 
We went along the fence. 
"Hush." Luster said. "How can Imake them come over here, if they aintcoming. Wait. They'llbe some in aminute. Look yonder. Here they come." 
I went along the fence, to the gate, where the girls passed with their 
booksatchels. "You, Benjy." Luster said. 
"Come back here."
11.1

You cant do no good looking through the gate, T.P. said. Miss Caddy done 
gone long ways away. Done got married and left you. You cant do no 
good, holding to the gate and crying. She cant hear you. 
What is it he wants, T.P. Mother said. Cant you play with him and keep 
him quiet.
He want to go down yonder and look through the gate, T.P. said. 
Well, he cannot do it, Mother said. It's raining. You will just have to play 
with him and keep him quiet. You, Benjamin.
Aint nothing going to quiet him, T.P. said. He think if he down to the gate, 
Miss Caddy come back. Nonsense, Mother said. 

12.1I could hear them talking. I went out the door and I couldn't hear them, 
and I went down to the gate, where the girls passed with their 
booksatchels. They looked at me, walking fast, with their heads turned. I 
tried to say, but they went on, andI went along the fence, trying to say, and 


they went faster. Then they were running and I came to the corner of the 
fence and I couldn't go anyfurther, and I held to the fence, looking after 
them and trying to say. 
"You,Benjy." T.P.said."What youdoing, slipping out. Dont you know 
Dilsey whip you."
"You cant do no good, moaning and slobbering through the fence." T.P. 
said. "You done skeered them chillen. Look at them, walking on the other 
side of the street."
14.1

How did he get out, Father said. Did you leave the gate unlatched when 
you came in, Jason.
Of course not, Jason said. Dont you know I've got better sense than to do 
that. Do you think I wanted anything like this to happen. This family isbad enough, God knows. I could have told you, all the time. I reckon you'llsend him to Jackson, now. If Mr Burgess dont shoot him first. 
Hush, Father said. 
I could have told you, all the time, Jason said. 

14.2It was open when I touched it, and I held to it in the twilight. I wasn't 
crying, and I tried to stop, watching the girls comingalongin the twilight. I 
wasn't crying.
"There he is."
They stopped.
"He cant get out.He wont hurt anybody, anyway. Come on."
"I'm scared to. I'm scared. I'm going to cross the street." 
"He cant get out."
I wasn't crying.
"Dontbe a fraid cat. Come on."
They came on in the twilight. I wasn't crying, and I held to the gate. 
They came slow. 
"I'm scared."
"He wonthurt you. I passhere every day. He just runs along the fence."
They came on. I opened the gate and they stopped, turning. I was trying to 
say, and I caughther, trying to say, and she screamed and I was trying to 
say and tryingarid the bright shapes began tostop and I tried to get out. I 


tried to get it off of my face, but the bright shapes were going again. They 
were going up the hill to where it fell away and I tried to cry. But when I 
breathed in, I couldn't breathe outagain to cry, and I tried to keep from 
falling off the hill and I fell off the hill into the bright, whirling shapes. 
19.14

Here, looney, Luster said. Here come some. Hush your slobbering and 
moaning, now.

They came to the flag. He tookit out and they hit, then he put the flag back. 
"Mister." Luster said. 
He looked around. "What." he said. 
"Want to buy a golf ball." Luster said. 
"Let's see it." he said. He came to the fence and Luster reached the ballthrough.
"Where'd you get it." he said. 
"Found it." Luster said. 
"I know that."he said."Where. In somebody's golfbag." 
"I found it laying over here in the yard." Luster said."I'll take a quarter for 
it."
"What makes you thinkit's yours." he said. 
"I found it." Luster said. 
"Then find yourself another one."he said. He put it in his pocket and went 
away.
"I got to go to that show tonight."Luster said. 
"That so." he said. He went to the table. "Fore caddie." he said.He hit. 
"I'll declare." Luster said. "You fusses when you dont see them and youfusses when you does. Why cant you hush. Dont you reckon folks gets tired 
of listening toyouall the time. Here. You dropped your jimson weed." He 
picked it up and gave itback to me. "Youneeds a new one. You boutwore 
that one out." We stood at the fence and watched them. 
"That white man hard to get alongwith." Luster said. "You see him take my 
ball." They went on. We went on along the fence. We came to the garden 
and we couldn't go any further. I held to the fence and looked through the 
flower spaces. They went away.
"Now youaint got nothing to moan about." Luster said. "Hushup. I the one 
got something to moan over, youaint.Here. Whyn't youhold on to that 


weed. You be bellering about itnext."He gave me the flower. "Where you 
headingnow.
Our shadows were on the grass. They got to the trees before we did. Minegot there first. Then we got there, and then the shadows were gone.There 
was a flower in the bottle. I put the other flower in it. 
"Aint you a grown man, now. Luster said. "Playing with two weeds in a 
bottle. You know what they going to do with you when MissCahline die.
They going to send you toJackson, where you belong. Mr Jason sayso.
Where you can hold the bars all day long with the rest of the looneysand 
slobber. How you like that."
Luster knocked the flowers over with his hand. "That's what they'll do to 
you atJackson when you starts bellering." 
I tried to pick up the flowers. Luster picked them up, and they wentaway. I 
began to cry.
"Beller." Luster said. "Beller. Youwant something tobeller about. All right, 
then. Caddy."he whispered. "Caddy. Beller now. Caddy." 
"Luster." Dilsey said from the kitchen. 
The flowers came back.
"Hush." Luster said. "Here they is. Look. It's fixed back just like it was at 
first. Hush,now."
"You, Luster." Dilsey said. 
"Yessum." Luster said."We coming. You done played hell. Get up."He 
jerked my arm and I gotup. We went out of the trees. Our shadowswere 
gone.
"Hush." Luster said. "Lookat all them folks watching you.Hush." 
"Youbring him on here." Dilsey said. She came down the steps. 
"What you done to him now." she said. 
"Aint done nothing to him." Luster said. "He just started bellering." 
"Yes youis." Dilsey said. "You done something to him. Where youbeen." 
"Over yonder under them cedars." Luster said. 
"Getting Quentin all riled up." Dilsey said. "Why cant you keep him away 
from her. Dont you know she dontlike him where she at." 
"Gotas much time for him as Iis." Luster said. "He aintnone ofmy uncle." 
"Dont you sass me,nigger boy." Dilsey said. 
"I aint done nothing to him." Luster said. "He was playing there, and all of 


a sudden he started bellering." 
"Is you been projecking with his graveyard." Dilsey said. 
"I aint touched his graveyard." Luster said. 
"Dont lie to me, boy." Dilseysaid.We went up the steps and into the 
kitchen. Dilsey opened the firedoor and drew a chair up in front of itand I 
sat down. I hushed.
2.2

What you want to get her started for, Dilsey said. Whyn't you keep himout of there.
He was just looking at the fire, Caddy said. Mother was telling him hisnew name. We didn't mean to get her started. 
I knows you didn't, Dilsey said. Him at one end of the house and her at the 
other. You let my things alone, now. Dont you touch nothing till I get 
back.

19.15"Aint you shamed of yourself." Dilsey said. "Teasing him."She set the cake 
on the table.
"I aintbeen teasing him." Luster said. "He was playing with thatbottle fullof dogfenneland all ofa sudden he started up bellering. You heard him." 
"Youaint done nothing to his flowers." Dilsey said. 
"I aint touched his graveyard." Luster said. "What I want withhis truck. I 
was just huntingfor that quarter." 
"You lostit, did you." Dilsey said. She lit the candles on the cake. Some of 
them were little ones. Some were big ones cutinto little pieces. "I told you 
to go put it away. Now I reckon you wantme to get you another one from 
Frony."
"I got to go to that show, Benjy or no Benjy." Luster said. "I aint going to 
follow him around dayandnightboth." 
"You going to dojust what he want you to, nigger boy." Dilseysaid."You 
hear me."
"Aint I always done it." Luster said. "Dont Ialways does what he wants. 
Dont I, Benjy."
"Then you keep it up." Dilsey said. "Bringing him in here, bawlingand 
getting her started too. You all goahead and eat this cake,now, before 
Jason come. I dont want him jumping on me abouta cake I bought with 


my own money. Me bakinga cake here, with him counting every egg that 
comes into this kitchen. See can you let him alone now, lessyou dont want 
to go to that show tonight." 
Dilsey went away.
"You cantblow outno candles." Luster said."Watch me blow them out." 
He leaned down and puffed his face. The candles went away. I began to cry. 
"Hush." Luster said. "Here. Look at the fire whiles I cuts this cake." 
2.3

I could hear the clock, and I could hear Caddy standing behind me, and I 
could hear the roof It's still raining, Caddy said. I hate rain. I hate 
everything. And then her head came into my lap and she was crying, 
holding me, and I began to cry. Then I looked at the fire again and the 
bright, smooth shapes went again. I could hear the clock and the roof and 
Caddy.

19.16I ate some cake. Luster's hand came and took another piece. I could hear 
him eating. I looked at the fire. 
A long piece of wire came across my shoulder. It went to the door, and then 
the fire went away. Ibegan to cry.
"What you howling fornow." Luster said. "Look there." The fire wasthere. 
I hushed. "Cantyou setand look at the fire and be quiet like mammy toldyou." Luster said. "You ought tobe ashamed of yourself.Here. Here's you 
some more cake."
"What you done to him now." Dilsey said. "Cantyounever let him alone." 
"I was just trying to get him to hush up and not sturb Miss Cahline."Luster 
said. "Something gothim started again." 
"And I know what that somethingname." Dilsey said. "I'm going to get 
Versh to take a stickto you when he comes home. You just trying yourself. 
You been doingit all day. Did youtake him down to the branch." 
"Nome." Luster said. "We been right here in this yard all day, like you 
said." 
His hand came for another piece of cake. Dilsey hit hishand. "Reachit 
again, and I chop it right off with this here butcher knife." Dilseysaid. "I 
bet he aint had one piece of it." 
"Yes he is." Luster said. "He already had twice as much as me. Ask him if 


he aint."
"Reach hit one more time." Dilseysaid. "Just reach it." 
2.4

That's right, Dilsey said. I reckon it'll be my time to cry next. Reckon 
Maury going to let me cry on him a while, too. 
His name's Benjy now, Caddy said. 
How come it is, Dilsey said. He aint wore out the name he was born with 
yet, is he.
Benjamin came out of the bible, Caddy said. It's a better name for himthan Maury was.
How come it is, Dilsey said. 
Mother says it is, Caddy said. 
Huh, Dilsey said. Name aint going to help him. Hurt him, neither. Folks 
dont have no luck, changing names. My name been Dilsey since fore I 
could remember and it be Dilsey when they's long forgot me. 
How will they know it's Dilsey, when it's long forgot, Dilsey, Caddy said. 
It'll be in the Book, honey, Dilsey said. Writ out. 
Can you read it, Caddy said. 
Wont have to, Dilsey said. They'll read it for me. All I got to do is say Ise 
here.

19.17The long wire came across my shoulder, and the fire went away. I began to 
cry.
Dilsey and Luster fought.
"I seen you." Dilsey said. "Oho, I seen you." She dragged Luster out of the 
corner, shaking him. "Wasn'tnothingbothering him, was they. You just 
wait till your pappy come home. Iwish I was young like I use to be, I'd tear 
them years right offyour head. I good mind to lock you upin that cellar 
and not let you go to that show tonight, I sho is." 
"Ow, mammy." Luster said. "Ow,mammy.
I put my hand out to where the fire had been. 
"Catch him." Dilsey said. "Catch him back." 
My hand jerked back and I putit in my mouth and Dilsey caughtme. I 
could still hear the clock between my voice. Dilsey reached backandhitLuster on the head. My voice wasgoing loud every time. 


"Get that soda." Dilsey said. She took my hand out of my mouth. Myvoice 
went louder then and my hand tried to go back to my mouth,but Dilsey 
held it. My voice went loud. She sprinkled soda on my hand. 
"Look in the pantry and tear a piece off of that rag hanging on the nail." she 
said. "Hush,now. You dont want to make your maw sickagain, doesyou. 
Here, look at the fire. Dilsey make your hand stop hurtinginjust a minute. 
Look at the fire."She opened the fire door. I looked at the fire, but my hand 
didn't stop and I didn't stop. Myhand was trying to go to mymouth,but 
Dilsey held it.
She wrapped the cloth around it.Mother said, 
"Whatis itnow. Cant I even be sick in peace. Do I have to get up outof bed 
to come down to him, with two grown negroes to take care of him." 
"He all right now." Dilsey said. "He going to quit. He justburnt his hand a 
little." 
"With two grown negroes, you must bring himinto the house, bawling." 
Mother said. "You got him started on purpose, because you know I'm sick." 
She came and stood by me."Hush." she said. "Right this minute. Didyou 
give him this cake." 
"I boughtit." Dilsey said. "It nevercome out of Jason's pantry. I fixedhimsome birthday."
"Do you want to poison him with that cheap store cake." Mother said. "Is 
that what you are trying to do. Am I never to have one minute's peace."
"You go on backup stairsand laydown." Dilseysaid."It'll quit smartinghim in aminute now, and he'll hush. Come on,now." 
"And leave him down here for youall to do something else to." Mother 
said. "How can I lie there, with him bawling down here. Benjamin.Hush 
this minute."
"They aint nowhere else to take him." Dilseysaid."We aint got the room 
we use to have. He cantstay out in the yard, crying where all the neighbors 
can see him."
"I know, Iknow." Mothersaid. "It's all my fault. I'll be gone soon,and you 
and Jason will both getalongbetter." She began to cry. 
"You hush that,now." Dilsey said. "You'll get yourself down again. You 
come on back up stairs. Luster going to take him to the liberry and play 
with him till I get his supper done." 


Dilsey and Mother went out.
"Hushup." Luster said."You hush up. You want me toburn your other 
hand for you. Youaint hurt. Hushup." 
"Here." Dilsey said. "Stop crying,now." She gave me the slipper, and I 
hushed. "Take him to the liberry."she said. "And if I hear him again, I 
going to whip youmyself."
We went to the library. Luster turned on the light. The windows went 
black, and the dark tall place on the wall came and I went and touched it. It 
was like a door, onlyit wasn't a door. 
The fire came behind me and I went to the fire and sat on the floor, holdingthe slipper. The fire went higher. It went onto the cushion in Mother'schair.
"Hushup." Luster said."Cant younever get done for a while. Here I done 
built you a fire, and you wont evenlook at it." 
2.5

Your name is Benjy, Caddy said. Do you hear. Benjy. Benjy. 
Dont tell him that, Mother said. Bring him here. 
Caddy lifted me under the arms.
Get up, Mau— I mean Benjy, she said. 
Dont try to carry him, Mother said. Cant you lead him over here. Is that 
too much for you to think of. 
I can carry him, [...] 
1.14Caddy said. "Let me carry him up,Dilsey." 
"Go on, Minute." Dilsey said. "You aintbig enough to tote a flea. Yougo on 
and be quiet, like MrJason said." 
There was a light at the top of the stairs. Father was there, in his shirt 
sleeves. The way he looked said Hush. Caddy whispered, 
"Is Mother sick." 
2.6

Versh set me down and we went into Mother's room. There was a fire. It 
was rising and falling on the walls. There was another fire in the mirror, 
I could smell the sickness. It was on a cloth folded on Mother's head. Her 
hair was on the pillow. The fire didn't reach it, but it shone on her hand, 
where her rings were jumping. 


"Come and tell Mother goodnight." Caddy said. We went to the bed. The 
fire went out of the mirror. Father got up from the bed and lifted me up 
and Mother put her hand on my head.
"What time isit." Mother said. Her eyes were closed. 
"Ten minutes to seven." Father said. "It's too early for him to go tobed." 
Mother said. "He'll wake up at daybreak, and I simply cannot bear another 
day like today."
"There, there." Father said. He touched Mother's face. 
"I know I'm nothingbuta burden to you. Mother said. "But I'll be gone 
soon. Then you willbe rid of mybothering." 
"Hush." Father said. "I'll take him downstairsa while."He took me up. 
"Come on, old fellow. Let's go down stairs a while. We'll have to be quietwhile Quentin is studying,now. 
Caddy went and leaned her face over the bed and Mother's hand came into 
the firelight. Her rings jumped on Caddy's back. 
1.15

Mother's sick, Father said. Dilsey will put you to bed. Where's Quentin.
Versh getting him, Dilsey said.

Father stood and watched us go past. We could hear Mother in her room. 
Caddy said "Hush." Jason was stillclimbing the stairs.He had hishands inhis pockets.
"Youall must be good tonight." Father said. "And be quiet, so you wont 
disturbMother."
"We'll be quiet." Caddy said."Youmustbe quietnow,Jason." She said. We 
tiptoed.
2.7

We could hear the roof. I could see the fire in the mirror too. Caddy lifted 
me again.

"Come on, now." she said. "Then you can come back to the fire. Hush, 
now."
"Candace." Mother said. 
"Hush,Benjy."Caddy said. "Mother wants youa minute. Like a good boy.
Then you can come back. Benjy." 
Caddy let me down, and I hushed. 
"Let him stay here, Mother. When he's through looking at the fire, then you 


can tell him."
"Candace." Mother said. Caddy stooped and lifted me. We staggered. 
"Candace." Mother said. 
"Hush." Caddy said. "You can stillsee it. Hush." 
"Bring him here." Mother said. "He's too big for you to carry. You must 
stop trying. You'll injure your back. All of our women have prided 
themselves on their carriage. Do you want to look like a washerwoman." 
"He's not too heavy." Caddy said. "I can carry him." 
"Well, I dont want him carried, then." Mother said. "A five year old child. 
No, no. Not in my lap. Let him stand up." 
"If you'll hold him, he'll stop." Caddy said. "Hush."she said. "You can go 
right back.Here. Here's your cushion. See." 
"Dont, Candace." Mother said. 
"Let him lookat it and he'll be quiet." Caddy said. "Hold up just aminute 
while I slip it out. There, Benjy. Look." 
I looked at it and hushed.
"You humor him too much."Mother said. "Youand your fatherboth. You 
dont realise that I am the one whohas to pay for it. Damuddy spoiledJason that way and it took him two years to outgrow it, and I am not strong 
enough to go through the same thing with Benjamin." 
"You dont need to bother with him." Caddy said. "I like to take care of him.
Dont I. Benjy. 
"Candace." Mother said. "I told you not to call him that. It wasbad enough 
when your father insisted on calling you by that silly nickname, and Iwillnot have him called by one. Nicknames are vulgar. Only common peopleuse them. Benjamin." she said. 
"Look at me." Mother said. 
"Benjamin." she said.She took my face in her hands and turned it tohers. 
"Benjamin." she said."Take that cushion away, Candace." 
"He'll cry." Caddy said. 
"Take that cushion away, like I told you." Mother said. "He must learn to 
mind."
The cushion went away.
"Hush,Benjy."Caddy said. 
"You go over there and sit down."Mother said. "Benjamin." She held my 


face to hers.
"Stop that." she said."Stopit." 
But I didn't stopand Mother caught me in her armsandbegan to cry, and I 
cried. Then the cushion came back and Caddy held it above Mother's head. 
She drew Mother back in the chair and Mother lay crying against the red 
and yellow cushion. 
"Hush, Mother." Caddy said. "Yougo up stairs and lay down, so you can be 
sick. I'll go get Dilsey."She led me to the fire and I looked at the bright, 
smooth shapes. I could hear the fire and the roof 
Father took me up.He smelled like rain.
"Well, Benjy." he said. "Have youbeen a goodboy today."
Caddy and Jason were fighting in the mirror. 
"You, Caddy." Father said.
They fought.Jason began to cry.
"Caddy." Father said.Jason was crying.He wasn't fightinganymore, but 
we could see Caddy fighting in the mirror and Father put me down and 
went into the mirror and fought too. He lifted Caddy up.She fought.Jason 
lay on the floor, crying. He had the scissors in hishand. Father held Caddy. 
"He cutup all Benjy's dolls." Caddy said. "I'll slithis gizzle." 
"Candace." Father said. 
"I will." Caddy said."I will."She fought. Father held her. She kicked at 
Jason. He rolled into the corner, out of the mirror. Father brought Caddy 
to the fire. They were all out of the mirror. Only the fire was init. Like the 
fire was in a door.
"Stop that." Father said."Do you want to make Mother sick in her room. 
Caddy stopped. "He cutup all the dolls Mau— Benjyand I made." Caddy 
said. "He did it justfor meanness. 
"I didn't."Jason said. He was sitting up, crying. "I didn't know theywere 
his. I just thought they were some old papers. 
"You couldn't help but know." Caddy said. "You did itjust" 
"Hush." Father said. "Jason." he said. "I'll make you some more 
tomorrow." Caddy said."We'll make a lot of them. Here, you can look at 
the cushion, too." 
19.18 


Jason came in.
I kept telling you to hush, Luster said. 
What's the matter now, Jason said. 

"He just trying hisself." Luster said. "That the way he been goingon allday."
"Why dont you let him alone, then." Jason said."If you cantkeep him 
quiet, you'll have to take him out to the kitchen. The rest of us cant shut 
ourselves up in a room like Mother does." 
"Mammy say keep him out the kitchen till she get supper." Luster said. 
"Then play with him and keep him quiet."Jason said. "Do I have to work 
all day and then come home to amad house." He opened the paper and 
read it. 
2.8

You can look at the fire and the mirror and the cushion too, Caddy said. 
You wont have to wait until supper to look at the cushion, now. We couldhear the roof. We could hear Jason too, crying loud beyond the wall.

19.19Dilsey said, "You come, Jason. You lettinghim alone, is you." 
"Yessum." Luster said. 
"Where Quentin." Dilsey said. "Supper near bout ready." 
"I don't know'm." Luster said. "I aint seen her." 
Dilsey went away. "Quentin." she said in the hall. "Quentin.Supper ready." 
2.9

We could hear the roof. Quentin smelled like rain, too. 
What did Jason do, he said. 
He cut up all Benjy's dolls, Caddy said. 
Mother said to not call him Benjy, Quentin said. He sat on the rug by us. I 
wish it wouldn't rain, he said. You cant do anything. 
You've been in a fight, Caddy said. Haven't you. 
It wasn't much, Quentin said. 
You can tell it, Caddy said. Father'll see it. 
I dont care, Quentin said. I wish it wouldn't rain.

19.20 


Quentin said, "Didn't Dilsey say supper was ready." 
"Yessum." Luster said. Jason looked at Quentin. Then he read the paper 
again.
Quentin came in. "She say itbout ready." Luster said. Quentin jumped 
down in Mother's chair. Luster said, 
"Mr Jason."
"What." Jason said.
"Let me have two bits." Luster said. 
"What for." Jason said.
"To go to the show tonight." Luster said. 
"I thought Dilsey was going to get aquarter from Frony for you." Jason 
said.
"She did." Luster said. "I lost it.Me and Benjy hunted all dayfor that 
quarter. You can ask him."
"Then borrow one from him." Jason said. "I have to work for mine."He 
read the paper. Quentin looked atthe fire. The fire was in her eyes and on 
her mouth. Her mouth was red.
"I tried to keep him away from there." Luster said. 
"Shut your mouth."Quentin said. Jason looked at her. 
"What did I tell you I was going to do if I saw you with that show fellow
again." he said.Quentin looked atthe fire. "Did you hear me."Jason said.
"I heard you." Quentin said. "Whydont you do it, then." 
"Dont you worry."Jason said. 
"I'm not." Quentin said. Jason read the paper again.
2.10

I could hear the roof Father leaned forward and looked at Quentin.
Hello, he said. Who won. 

"Nobody." Quentin said. "Theystopped us. Teachers." 
"Who wasit." Father said. "Will you tell." 
"It was all right." Quentin said. "He was as big asme." 
"That's good." Father said."Can you tell what it wasabout." 
"It wasn't anything."Quentin said. "He said he would puta frog in her desk 
and she wouldn't dare to whip him." 
"Oh." Father said. "She. And then what." 
"Yes, sir."Quentin said. "And then I kind of hit him." 


We could hear the roof and the fire, and a snuffling outside the door. 
"Where was he going to geta frog in November." Father said. 
"I dont know, sir." Quentin said. 
We could hear them.
"Jason." Father said. We could hear Jason. 
"Jason." Father said. "Come in here and stop that." 
We could hear the roof and the fire and Jason. 
"Stop that, now." Father said. "Do you want me to whip you again."Father 
lifted Jason up into the chair by him. Jason snuffled. We could hear the fire 
and the roof. Jason snuffled a little louder. 
"One more time." Father said. We could hear the fire and the roof. 
2.13

Dilsey said, All right. You all can come on to supper. 
Versh smelled like rain. He smelled like a dog, too. We could hear the fire 
and the roof.

9.1We could hear Caddy walking fast. Father and Mother looked at the door. 
Caddy passed it, walkingfast.She didn't look. She walked fast. 
"Candace." Mother said. Caddy stopped walking. 
"Yes, Mother." she said. 
"Hush, Caroline." Father said. 
"Come here." Mother said. 
"Hush, Caroline." Father said. "Let her alone." 
Caddy came to the door and stood there, looking at Father and Mother. 
Her eyes flew at me, and away. I began to cry. It went loud and I got up. 
Caddy came in and stood withher back to the wall, lookingat me. I went 
toward her, crying, and she shrank against the wall and I saw her eyes and 
I cried louder and pulled at her dress. She put her hands out but I pulled at 
her dress. Her eyes ran.
2.11

Versh said, Your name Benjamin now. You know how come your name 
Benjamin now. They making a bluegum out of you. Mammy say in old 
time your granpaw changed nigger's name, and he turn preacher, and 
when they look at him, he bluegum too. Didn't use to be bluegum, neither. 
And when family woman look him in the eye in the full of the moon, chile 


born bluegum. And one evening, when they was about a dozen them 
bluegum chillen running around the place, he never come home. Possum 
hunters found him in the woods, et clean. And you know who et him. 
Them bluegum chillen did. 

9.2We were in the hall. Caddy was still lookingat me. Her hand was against 
her mouth and I saw her eyes andI cried. We went up the stairs. She 
stopped again, against the wall, looking at me and I cried and she went on 
and I came on, crying,and she shrankagainst the wall, looking at me. She 
opened the door to her room, but I pulled at her dress and we went to the 
bathroom and she stood against the door, looking at me. Then she put her 
arm across her face and I pushed at her, crying. 
19.21

What are you doing to him, Jason said. Why cant you let him alone. 
I aint touching him, Luster said. He been doing this way all day long. He 
needs whipping.
He needs to be sent to Jackson, Quentin said. How can anybody live in ahouse like this. 
If you dont like it, young lady, you'd better get out, Jason said. 
I'm going to, Quentin said. Dont you worry. 

2.12Versh said,"Youmove backsome,so I can dry my legs off."He shoved me 
back a little. "Dont you start bellering,now. You can still see it. That's allyou have to do. You aint hadtobe out in the rain like I is. You'sborn lucky 
and dont know it." He lay on hisback before the fire. 
"You know how come your name Benjamin now." Versh said. "Your 
mamma too proud for you. Whatmammysay."
"Yoube still there and let me dry my legs off." Versh said. "Or you know 
what I'll do. I'll skin your rinktum." 
We could hear the fire and the roof and Versh. 
Versh got up quick and jerked his legs back. Father said, "All right, Versh." 
"I'll feed him tonight."Caddy said. "Sometimes he cries when Versh feeds 
him."
"Take this tray up." Dilseysaid."And hurry back and feed Benjy."
"Dont you want Caddy to feed you." Caddy said. 


19.22

Has he got to keep that old dirty slipper on the table, Quentin said. Why 
dont you feed him in the kitchen. It's like eating with a pig. 
If you dont like the way we eat, you'd better not come to the table, Jason 
said.

2.14Steam came off of Roskus. He was sitting in front of the stove. The oven 
door was open and Roskushad his feet in it.Steam came off the bowl.
Caddy put the spoon intomy mouth easy. There was a black spot on the 
inside of the bowl.
19.23

Now, now, Dilsey said. He aint going to bother you no more. 

2.15It got down below the mark. Then the bowl was empty. It went away."He's 
hungry tonight." Caddy said. The bowl came back. I couldn't see the spot. 
Then I could. "He's starved, tonight." Caddy said. "Look how much he's 
eaten."
19.24

Yes he will, Quentin said. You all send him out to spy on me. I hate thishouse. I'm going to run away. 

2.16Roskus said, "It going to rain all night." 
19.25

You've been running a long time, not to've got any further off than 
mealtime, Jason said. 
See if I dont, Quentin said. 

2.17"Then I dont know what I going to do." Dilsey said. "It caught me in the hipso badnow I cant scarcely move. Climbing them stairs all evening."
19.26

Oh, I wouldn't be surprised, Jason said. I wouldn't be surprised at 
anything you'd do. 
Quentin threw her napkin on the table.
Hush your mouth, Jason, Dilsey said. She went and put her arm around 


Quentin. Sit down, honey, Dilsey said. He ought to be shamed of hisself 
throwing what aint your fault up to you. 

2.18"She sulling again, isshe." Roskussaid. 
"Hush your mouth." Dilsey said. 
19.27

Quentin pushed Dilsey away. She looked at Jason. Her mouth was red. 
She picked up her glass of water and swung her arm back, looking at 
Jason. Dilsey caught her arm. They fought. The glass broke on the table,
and the water ran into the table. Quentin was running. 

2.19"Mother's sick again."Caddy said. 
"Shoshe is." Dilsey said."Weather like this make anybody sick. When you 
going to get done eating,boy." 
19.28

Goddam you, Quentin said. Goddam you. We could hear her running on 
the stairs. We went to the library. 

2.20Caddy gave me the cushion, and Icould look at the cushion and the mirror 
and the fire.
"We mustbe quiet while Quentin's studying." Father said."Whatare you 
doing, Jason."
"Nothing."Jason said.
"Suppose you come over here to do it, then." Father said. 
Jason came out of the corner.
"What are you chewing." Father said. 
"Nothing. "Jason said. 
"He's chewing paper again." Caddy said. 
"Come here, Jason." Father said. 
Jason threw into the fire. It hissed, uncurled, turning black. Then it wasgray. Then it was gone. Caddy andFather and Jason were in Mother'schair. Jason's eyes were puffed shut and his mouth moved, like tasting. 
Caddy's head was on Father's shoulder. Her hair was like fire, and little 
points of fire were in her eyes, and I went and Father lifted me into the 
chair too, and Caddy held me. She smelled like trees. 


19.29

She smelled like trees. In the corner it was dark, but I could see the 
window. I squatted there, holding the slipper. I couldn't see it, but my 
hands saw it, and I could hear it getting night, and my hands saw the 
slipper but I couldn't see myself but my hands could see the slipper, and I 
squatted there, hearing it getting dark. 
Here you is, Luster said. Look what I got. He showed it to me. You know 
where I got it. Miss Quentin give it to me. I knowed they couldn't keep me 
out. What you doing, off in here. I thought you done slipped back out 
doors. Aint you done enough moaning and slobbering today, without 
hiding off in this here empty room, mumbling and taking on. Come on 
here to bed, so I can get up there before it starts. I cant fool with you allnight tonight. Just let them horns toot the first toot and I done gone. 

1.16We didn't go to our room. 
"Thisis where we have the measles." Caddy said. "Why do we have to sleepin here tonight."
"What you care where you sleep."Dilsey said. She shut the door andsatdown andbegan toundress me. Jason began to cry. "Hush." Dilsey said. 
"I want to sleep with Damuddy." Jason said. 
"She's sick." Caddy said."You can sleep with her when she gets well. Cant 
he, Dilsey."
"Hush,now." Dilsey said. Jason hushed. 
"Our nighties are here, and everything." Caddy said. "It's like moving." 
"And youbetter get into them." Dilsey said. "Yoube unbuttoning Jason. 
Caddy unbuttoned Jason. He began to cry.
"You want to get whipped." Dilseysaid. Jason hushed. 
19.30

Quentin, Mother said in the hall.
What, Quentin said beyond the wall. We heard Mother lock the door. She 
looked in our door and came in and stooped over the bed and kissed me 
on the forehead.
When you get him to bed, go and ask Dilsey if she objects to my having a 
hot water bottle, Mother said. Tell her that if she does, I'll try to get along 


without it. Tell her I just want to know. 
Yessum, Luster said. Come on. Get your pants off. 

1.17Quentin andVersh came in. Quentin had his face turned away. "What are 
you crying for." Caddy said. 
"Hush." Dilseysaid."Youall get undressed, now. You can go on home, 
Versh."
19.31

I got undressed and I looked at myself and I began to cry. Hush, Luster 
said. Looking for them aint going to do no good. They're gone. You keep 
on like this, and we aint going have you no more birthday. He put my 
gown on. I hushed, and then Luster stopped, his head toward the window. 
Then he went to the window and looked out. He came back and took my 
arm. Here she come, he said. Be quiet, now. We went to the window and 
looked out. It came out of Quentin's window and climbed across into the 
tree. We watched the tree shaking. The shaking went down the tree, then 
it came out and we watched it go away across the grass. Then we couldn't 
see it. Come on, Luster said. There now. Hear them horns. You get in that 
bed while my foots behaves. 

1.18There were two beds. Quentin gotin the other one.He turned his face to 
the wall. Dilsey putJason in withhim. Caddy took her dress off. 
"Just lookat your drawers." Dilsey said. "Youbetter be glad your maw aintseen you."
"I already told on her."Jason said. 
"I bound you would." Dilseysaid. 
"And see what you gotby it." Caddy said. "Tattletale." 
"What did I get byit."Jason said. 
"Whyn't you get your nightie on."Dilsey said. She went and helped Caddy 
take off her bodice and drawers. "Just look atyou." Dilseysaid.She 
wadded the drawers and scrubbed Caddy behind with them."It done 
soaked clean through onto you." she said. "But you wont get nobaththisnight.Here." She put Caddy's nightie on her and Caddy climbed intothe 
bed and Dilsey went to the door and stood with her hand on the light. "You 
all be quietnow, youhear." she said. 


"All right." Caddy said. "Mother's not coming in tonight." she said. "So we 
still have to mind me."
"Yes." Dilsey said. "Go to sleep, now." 
"Mother's sick." Caddy said. "She and Damuddy are both sick." 
"Hush." Dilseysaid."You go tosleep." 
The room went black, except the door. Then the door went black. Caddy 
said, "Hush, Maury" putting her hand on me. So I stayed hushed. We couldhear us. We could hear the dark.
It went away, and Father looked at us. He looked atQuentin and Jason, 
then he came and kissed Caddy and put his hand on my head. 
"Is Mother very sick." Caddy said. 
"No." Father said. "Are you going to take good care of Maury." 
"Yes." Caddy said.
Father went to the door and looked at us again. Then the dark came back, 
and he stood black in the door, and then the door turned black again. 
Caddy held me and I could hear us all, and the darkness, and something I 
could smell. And then I could see the windows, where the trees were 
buzzing. Then the dark began to go in smooth, bright shapes, like italways 
does, even when Caddy says that Ihave been asleep. 


June 2, 1910 

When the shadow of the sash appeared on the curtains it was between 
seven and eight oclock and then Iwas in time again, hearing the watch. It 
was Grandfather's and when Father gave it to me he said I give you the 
mausoleum of all hope and desire; it's rather excruciating-ly apt thatyou 
will use it to gain the reducto absurdum of all human experience which can 
fit your individual needs nobetter than it fitted his or his father's. I give it 
to you not that you may remember time, but that you might forget itnow 
and then for a moment and not spend all your breath trying to conquer it. 
Becauseno battle is ever won he said. They are not even fought. The field 
only reveals to man his own follyand despair, and victoryis an illusion of 
philosophers and fools.

 It was propped against the collar box and I lay listening to it.Hearingit, 
that is. I dontsuppose anybody ever deliberately listens to a watch or a 
clock. You dont have to. You can be oblivious to the sound for a longwhile,
then in a second of ticking it can create in the mind unbroken the long 
diminishing parade of time you didn't hear. Like Father said down the long 
and lonely light-rays you might see Jesus walking, like. And the good SaintFrancis that said Little Sister Death, that never had a sister.

 Through the wall I heard Shreve's bed-springs and then his slippers on 
the floor hishing. I gotup and went to the dresser and slid my hand along itand touched the watch and turnedit face-down and went back to bed. But 
the shadow of the sash was still there and I had learned to tell almost to the 
minute, so I'd have to turnmy back to it, feeling the eyes animals used to 
have in the back of their heads when it was on top, itching. It's always the 
idle habits you acquire which youwill regret. Father said that. ThatChrist 
was not crucified: he was worn away bya minute clicking of little wheels. 
That had no sister.

 And so as soon as Iknew I couldn't see it, I began to wonder what time it 
was. Father said that constant speculation regarding the position of 
mechanical hands on an arbitrarydial which is a symptom of mind-
function. Excrement Father said like sweating.And I saying All right. 
Wonder. Go on and wonder. 


 If it had been cloudy I could have looked at the window, thinkingwhat 
he said aboutidle habits. Thinkingit would be nice for them down atNew 
London if the weather held up like this. Why shouldn't it? The month of 
brides, the voice that breathed She ran right out of the mirror, out of the 
banked scent. Roses. Roses. Mr and Mrs Jason Richmond Compson 
announce the marriage of. Roses. Not virgins like dogwood, milkweed. I 
said I have committed incest, Father I said. Roses. Cunningand serene. Ifyou attend Harvard one year,butdont see the boat-race, there should be a 
refund. Let Jason have it. Give Jason a year atHarvard.

 Shreve stood in the door, putting his collar on, his glasses glintingrosily, 
as though he had washed them with his face. "You taking a cut thismorning?"

 "Is it that late?"

 He looked at his watch."Bell in two minutes."

 "I didn't know it was that late."He was still looking at the watch, hismouth shaping."I'll have to hustle. I cant stand another cut. The dean toldme last week--" He put the watchbackinto his pocket. Then I quit talking.

 "You'd better slip on your pants and run," he said. He went out.

 I got up and moved about, listening to him through the wall. He entered 
the sitting-room, toward the door.

 "Aren't you ready yet?"

 "Not yet. Run along. I'll make it."

 He went out. The door closed. Hisfeet went down the corridor. Then I 
could hear the watch again. I quitmovingaround and went to the window 
and drew the curtainsaside and watched them running for chapel, the 
same ones fighting the same heaving coat-sleeves, the same books and 
flapping collars flushing past like debris on aflood, andSpoade. CallingShreve my husband. Ah let him alone, Shreve said,if he's got better sense 
than to chase after the little dirty sluts, whose business. In the Southyou 
are ashamed ofbeing a virgin. Boys. Men. They lie aboutit. Because it 
means less to women, Father said.He saidit was men invented virginity 
not women. Father said it's like death: only a state in which the others are 
left and I said, But tobelieve it doesn't matter and he said, That's what's so 
sad about anything: not only virginityand I said, Why couldn't it have been 
me and not her who is unvirgin and he said, That's why that's sad too; 


nothing is even worth the changing of it, and Shreve said if he's got better 
sense than to chase after the little dirty sluts and I said Did you ever have a 
sister? Did you? Did you?

 Spoade was in the middle of them like a terrapin in a street full of 
scuttering dead leaves, his collar abouthis ears, moving at his customary 
unhurried walk.He was from South Carolina,a senior. It washis club'sboast that he never ran for chapeland hadnever got there on time and had 
never been absentin four years and had never made either chapel or first 
lecture with a shirt on hisbackand socks on his feet. About ten oclock he'd 
come in Thompson's, get two cupsof coffee, sit down and take his socks 
out of his pocket and remove hisshoes and put them on while the coffee 
cooled. About noon you'd see him with a shirt and collar on, like anybody 
else. The others passed him running, but he never increased his pace at all.
After a while the quad was empty.

 A sparrow slanted across the sunlight, onto the window ledge, and 
cocked his head at me. His eye was round and bright. First he'd watch me 
with one eye, then flick! and it would be the other one, his throat pumpingfaster than any pulse. The hour began to strike. The sparrow quit swappingeyes and watched me steadily with the same one until the chimes ceased, 
as if he were listening too. Then he flicked off the ledge and was gone.

 It was a while before the last stroke ceased vibrating. It stayed in the air, 
more felt than heard, for a long time. Like all the bells that ever rang still 
ringing in the long dying light-rays and Jesus and Saint Francis talkingabout his sister. Because ifit were just to hell;if that were all of it. 
Finished. If thingsjust finished themselves. Nobody else there but her and 
me. If we could just have done somethingso dreadful that they would have 
fled hell except us. I have committed incest I said Father it was I it was 
not Dalton Ames And when he put Dalton Ames. Dalton Ames. Dalton 
Ames. When he put the pistol in my hand I didn't. That's why I didn't. He 
would be there and she would and I would. Dalton Ames. Dalton Ames. 
Dalton Ames. If we could have just done something so dreadful and Father 
said That's sad too people cannotdo anything that dreadful they cannot do 
anything very dreadful at all they cannot even remember tomorrow what 
seemed dreadful today and I said, You can shirkall things and he said, Ah 
can you. And I will look down and see my murmuringbones and the deep 


water like wind, like a roof of wind, and after a long time they cannot 
distinguish even bonesupon the lonely andinviolate sand. Until on the 
Day when He saysRise only the flat-iron would come floating up. It'snot 
when you realise thatnothing can help you--religion, pride, anything--it'swhen you realise that you dontneed any aid. Dalton Ames. Dalton Ames. 
Dalton Ames. If I could have been his mother lying with open body lifted 
laughing,holdinghis father withmy hand refraining,seeing, watching himdie before he lived. One minute she was standing in the door

 I went to the dresser and took up the watch, with the face still down. I 
tapped the crystal on the corner of the dresser and caught the fragments of 
glass in my hand and put them into the ashtray and twisted the hands off 
and put them in the tray. The watch ticked on. I turned the face up, the 
blank dial with little wheels clicking and click-ingbehindit, notknowinganybetter. Jesus walking on Galilee and Washington not telling lies. 
Father broughtbacka watch-charm from the Saint Louis Fair toJason: a 
tiny opera glass into which you squinted with one eye and saw a 
skyscraper, a ferris wheel all spidery, Niagara Falls on a pinhead. There 
was a red smear on the dial. When I saw it my thumb began to smart. I put 
the watch down and wentintoShreve's room and got the iodine and 
painted the cut. I cleaned the rest of the glass out of the rim with a towel.

I laid out two suits ofunderwear, with socks, shirts, collarsand ties, and 
packed my trunk. I put in everything except my new suit and an old one 
and two pairs of shoes and two hats, and mybooks. I carried the books into 
the sitting-room and stacked them on the table, the ones I hadbrought 
from home and the ones Father said it used to be a gentleman was 
known by his books; nowadays he is known by the ones he has not 
returned and locked the trunkand addressed it. The quarter hour 
sounded. I stopped and listened to it until the chimes ceased.

 I bathed and shaved. The water made my finger smart a little, so I 
painted itagain. I put on my new suit and put my watch on and packed the 
other suit and the accessories and my razor and brushes in my handbag, 
and folded the trunkkey into a sheet of paper and put itin an envelope and 
addressed it to Father, and wrote the two notes and sealed them.

 The shadow hadn't quite cleared the stoop. I stopped inside the door, 
watching the shadow move. It moved almost perceptibly, creeping back 


inside the door, driving the shadow back into the door. Only she was 
running already when I heard it. In the mirror she was running before I 
knew what it was. That quick her train caught up over her arm she ran 
out of the mirror like a cloud, her veil swirling in long glints her heelsbrittle and fast clutch ing her dress onto her shoulder with the other hand, 
run ning out of the mirror the smells roses roses the voice that breathed 
o'er Eden. Then she was across the porch I couldn't hear her heels then in 
the moonlight like a cloud, the floating shadow of the veil running across 
the grass, into the bellowing. She ran out of her dress, clutching her 
bridal, running into the bellowing where T. P. in the dew Whooey 
Sassprilluh Benjy under the box bellowing. Father had a V-shaped silver 
cuirass on his running chest

 Shreve said, "Well, you didn't.... Is it a wedding or a wake?"

 "I couldn't make it," I said.

 "Not with all that primping. What'sthe matter? You think this was 
Sunday?"

 "I reckon the police wont get me for wearing mynew suit one time," I 
said.

 "I was thinkingabout the Square students. They'll think you go to 
Harvard. Have you got too proud to at tend classes too?"

 "I'm going to eatfirst." The shadow on the stoop was gone. I stepped 
into sunlight, findingmy shadow again. I walked down the steps justahead 
of it. The half hour went. Then the chimes ceased and died away.

 Deacon wasn't at the postoffice either. I stamped the two envelopes and 
mailed the one to Father and putShreve's in my inside pocket, and then I 
remembered where I had last seen the Deacon. It was on Decoration Day, 
in aG.A.R. uniform, in the middle of the parade. If you waited long enough 
on any corner you would see him in whatever parade came along. The one 
before was on Columbus' or Garibaldi's or somebody's birthday.He was inthe Street Sweepers' section, in a stovepipe hat, carryinga two inch Italian 
flag, smoking a cigar among the brooms and scoops. But the last time was 
the G.A.R. one, because Shreve said:

 "There now. Just lookat what your grandpa did to that poor oldnigger."

 "Yes," I said. "Now he can spend day after day marching in parades. If it 


hadn't been formy grandfather, he'd have to work like whitefolks."

 I didn't see him anywhere. But I never knew even a workingnigger that 
you could find when you wanted him, let alone one that lived off the fat of 
the land. A car came along. I wentover to town and went to Parker'sand 
had a good breakfast. While I waseating I heard a clock strike the hour. 
But then I suppose it takes at leastone hour to lose time in, whohasbeen 
longer than history getting into the mechanical progression ofit.

 When I finished breakfast I bought a cigar. The girl said a fifty cent one 
was the best, so I took one and lit it and went out to the street. I stood there 
and took a couple of puffs, then I held it in my hand and went on toward 
the corner. I passed a jeweller's window, but I looked away in time. At the 
corner two bootblacks caughtme, one on either side, shrill and raucous, 
like blackbirds. I gave the cigar to one of them, and the other one a nickel. 
Then they let me alone. The one with the cigar was trying to sell it to the 
other for the nickel.

 There was a clock, high up in the sun,and I thought about how, when 
you dont want to do a thing, yourbody will try to trick youinto doing it, 
sort of unawares. I could feel the muscles in the back of myneck, andthen 
I could hear my watch ticking away in my pocket and after a while I had allthe other sounds shut away, leaving only the watch in my pocket. I turned 
backup the street, to the window. He was working at the table behind the 
window. He was going bald. There was a glassin his eye--ametal tube 
screwed into his face. I went in.

 The place was full of ticking, like crickets in September grass, andI 
could hear a big clock on the wall above his head. He looked up, his eye bigand blurred and rushingbeyond the glass. I took mine out and handed it to 
him.

 "I broke my watch."

 He flipped it over in his hand. "I should sayyou have. You must have 
stepped on it."

 "Yes, sir. I knocked it off the dresser and stepped on it in the dark.It's 
still running though."

 He pried the back open and squinted into it."Seems tobe all right. I 
cant tell until I go over it, though.I'll go into it this afternoon."

 "I'll bringit back later," I said. "Would you mind telling me if anyof 


those watches in the window are right?"

 He held my watch on his palm and looked up at me withhisblurred 
rushing eye.

 "I made a bet witha fellow," I said. "And I forgot my glasses thismorning."

 "Why, all right," he said. He laid the watch down and half rose on his 
stool and looked over the barrier. Then he glanced up at the wall."It'stwen--"

 "Dont tell me," I said, "please sir. Just tell me ifany of them are right."

 He looked at me again.He satback on the stool andpushed the glass up 
onto his forehead. It left a red circle around his eye and when it was gone 
his whole face looked naked. "What're you celebrating today?" he said. 
"Thatboat race aintuntil next week, is it?"

 "No, sir. This is just a private celebration. Birthday. Are any of them 
right?"

 "No. But they haven't been regulated and set yet. If you're thinking of 
buying one of them—-"

 "No, sir. I dont need a watch. We have a clock in our sitting room.I'llhave this one fixed when I do." I reached my hand.

 "Better leave it now."

 "I'll bringit back later." He gave me the watch. I put it in my pocket. I 
couldn't hear it now,above all the others. "I'm much obliged to you. I hope 
I haven't taken up your time."

 "That's all right. Bringit in when youare ready. And youbetter put off 
this celebration until after we win that boat race."

 "Yes, sir. I reckon I had."

 I went out, shutting the door upon the ticking. I looked back into the 
window. He was watching me across the barrier. There were about adozen 
watches in the window, a dozen different hours and each with the same 
assertive and contradictory assurance that mine had, withoutany hands at 
all. Contradicting one another. I could hear mine, ticking away inside my 
pocket, even though nobody could see it, even thoughit could tell nothingif anyone could.

 And so I told myself to take that one. Because Father said clocks slay 
time. He said timeis dead as longas it is being clicked offby little wheels; 


only when the clock stops does time come to life. The hands were extended, 
slightly off the horizontalat a faint angle, like a gull tiltinginto the wind. 
Holding all I used tobe sorry about like the new moon holding water, 
niggers say. The jeweller was working again,bent over hisbench, the tube 
tunnelled into his face. His hair was parted in the center. The part ran up 
into the bald spot, like a drainedmarsh in December.

 I saw the hardware store from across the street. I didn't know you 
bought flat-ironsby the pound.

 "Maybe you want a tailor's goose," the clerk said. "They weigh ten 
pounds." Only they were bigger than I thought.So I got two six-pound littleones, because they would look like a pair of shoes wrapped up. They feltheavy enough together, but I thought again how Father had said about the 
reducto absurdum of human experience, thinking how the only 
opportunity I seemed to have for the application ofHarvard. Maybe by 
next year; thinking maybe it takestwo years in school to learn to do that 
properly.

 But they felt heavy enoughin the air. A car came. I got on. I didn'tsee 
the placard on the front. It was full, mostly prosperous looking peoplereading newspapers. The only vacant seat was beside a nigger. He wore a 
derby and shined shoes and he was holdinga dead cigar stub. I used to 
think that aSoutherner had to be always conscious ofniggers. I thought 
that Northerners would expect him to. When I first came East Ikept 
thinking You've got to remember to think of them as colored people not 
niggers, and ifit hadn't happened that I wasn't thrown with many ofthem, 
I'd have wasted a lot of time and trouble before I learned that the best way 
to take all people, black or white, is to take them for what they thinkthey 
are, then leave them alone. That was when I realisedthata Digger isnot a 
person so muchas a form of behavior; a sort of obverse reflection of the 
white people he lives among. But I thought atfirst that I ought tomiss 
having a lot of them around me because I thought that Northernersthought I did,but I didn't know that I really had missed Roskus and Dilsey 
and them until that morning in Virginia. The train was stopped when I 
waked and I raised the shade and looked out. The car was blockinga road 
crossing, where two white fences came down a hill and then sprayed 
outward and downward like part of the skeleton of ahorn, and there was a 


nigger on a mulein the middle of the stiff ruts, waitingfor the train to 
move. How long he had been there I didn't know,but he sat straddle of the 
mule, hishead wrapped in a piece of blanket, as if they had been built there 
with the fence and the road, or with the hill, carved out of the hill itself, like 
a sign put there saying You are home again.He didn't have a saddle and hisfeet dangled almost to the ground. The mule looked like a rabbit. I raised 
the window.

 "Hey, Uncle," I said. "Is this the way?"

 "Suh?"He looked at me, then he loosened the blanket and lifted it away 
from his ear.

 "Christmas gift!" I said.

 "Sho comin,boss. You done caught me, aint you."

 "I'll let you off this time." I dragged my pants out of the little hammock 
and got a quarter out. "But look out next time. I'll be comingback through 
here two days after New Year, and look out then." I threw the quarter out 
the window. "Buy yourself some Santy Claus."

 "Yes, suh," he said. He got down and picked up the quarter and rubbed 
it on his leg. "Thanky, young marster. Thanky." Then the train began to 
move. I leaned out the window, into the cold air, lookingback.He stood 
there beside the gaunt rabbit of amule, the two of them shabbyand 
motionless and unimpatient. The train swungaround the curve, the enginepuffing with short, heavyblasts, and they passed smoothlyfrom sight that 
way, with that quality about them of shabby and timeless patience, of staticserenity: thatblending of childlike and ready incompetence and 
paradoxical reliability that tends and protects them it loves out of allreason and robs them steadily and evades responsibilityand obligations by 
means toobarefaced to be called subterfuge even and is taken in theft or 
evasion with only that frankand spontaneousadmiration for the victor 
which a gentleman feels for anyone who beats him in a fair contest,and 
withal a fond and unflagging tolerance for whitefolks' vagaries like that of a 
grandparent for unpredictable and troublesome children, which I had 
forgotten. And all that day, while the train wound through rushing gaps 
and along ledges where movement was only a laboring sound of the 
exhaust and groaning wheels and the eternal mountains stood fadinginto 
the thick sky, I thought of home, of the bleak station and the mud and the 


niggers and country folks thronging slowly about the square, with toy 
monkeysand wagonsand candy in sacks and roman candles stickingout, 
and myinsides would move like they used to do in school when the bell 
rang.

 I wouldn't begin counting untilthe clock struck three. Then I wouldbegin, counting to sixty and folding down one finger and thinking ofthe 
other fourteen fingers waiting tobe folded down, or thirteen or twelve or 
eight or seven, until all ofa sudden I'd realise silence and the unwinkingminds,and I'd say"Ma'am?""Your name isQuentin, isn't it?" Miss Laura 
would say. Then more silence andthe cruel unwinking minds and hands 
jerkinginto the silence. "Tell Quentin who discovered the MississippiRiver, Henry." "DeSoto." Then the minds would go away,and after a whileI'd be afraid I had gotten behind and I'd count fast and fold down another 
finger, then I'd be afraid I was going too fast and I'd slow up, then I'd get 
afraid and count fast again.So Inever could come out even with the bell,
and the released surging of feet moving already, feeling earth in the scuffed 
floor, and the day like a pane of glass strucka light, sharp blow, andmy 
insides would move, sitting still. Moving sitting still. My bowels moved for 
thee. One minute she was standing in the door. Benjy. Bellowing. 
Benjamin the child of mine old age bellowing. Caddy! Caddy! 

I'm going to run away. He began to cry she went and touched him.
Hush. I'm not going to. Hush. He hushed. Dilsey. 

He smell what you tell him when he want to. Dont have to listen nor 
talk.

Can he smell that new name they give him? Can he smell bad luck? 

What he want to worry about luck for? Luck cant do him no hurt. 

What they change his name for then if aint trying to help his luck?

 The car stopped, started, stopped again. Below the window I watched 
the crowns of people's heads passing beneathnew straw hatsnot yet 
unbleached. There were women in the car now, with marketbaskets,and 
men in work-clothes were beginning to outnumber the shined shoesand 
collars.

 The nigger touched my knee. "Pardon me," he said. I swung my legs out 
and let him pass. We were going beside a blank wall, the sound clatteringbackinto the car, at the women with market baskets on their knees and a 


man in a stained hat with a pipe stuck in the band. I couldsmell water, and 
in abreakin the wall I saw a glintof water and two masts, and a gull 
motionless in midair, like on an invisible wire between the masts,and I 
raised my hand and through my coat touched the letters I had written. 
When the car stopped I got off.

 The bridge was open to let a schooner through.She was in tow, the tug 
nudgingalongunder her quarter, trailing smoke,but the ship herselfwas 
like she was moving without visible means. A man naked to the waist was 
coiling down a line on the fo'c's'le head. Hisbody wasburned the color of 
leaf tobacco. Another man in a straw hat withoutany crown wasat the 
wheel. The ship went through the bridge, moving under bare poles like a 
ghost in broad day, with three gulls hovering above the stern like toys on 
invisible wires.

 When it closed I crossed to the other side and leaned on the rail above 
the boathouses. The float was empty and the doors were closed. Crew just 
pulled in the late afternoon now, restingup before. The shadow of the 
bridge, the tiers of railing, my shadow leaningflatupon the water, so easilyhad I tricked it that would not quit me. At least fifty feet it was,and if I only 
had something to blotit into the water, holding ituntil it was drowned, the 
shadow of the package like two shoes wrapped up lying on the water. 
Niggers say a drowned man's shadow was watching for himin the water allthe time. It twinkled and glinted, like breathing, the floatslow like 
breathing too, and debris half submerged, healing out to the sea and the 
caverns and the grottoes of the sea. The displacement of water is equal to 
the something of something.Reducto absurdum ofall human experience, 
and two six-pound flat-irons weigh more than one tailor's goose. What a 
sinful waste Dilsey would say. Benjy knew it when Damuddy died. He 
cried. He smell hit. He smell hit.

 The tug came back downstream, the water shearing in long rollingcylinders, rocking the float at last with the echo of passage, the float 
lurching onto the rolling cylinderwitha plopping sound and a longjarringnoise as the door rolled back and two men emerged, carrying a shell.They 
set it in the water and a moment later Bland came out, with the sculls. He 
wore flannels, a gray jacket and astiff straw hat. Either he or his mother 
had read somewhere that Oxford students pulled in flannels and stiffhats, 


so early one March they boughtGerald a one pair shell and in hisflannels 
and stiff hat he went on the river. The folks at the boathouse threatened to 
call a policeman,but he went anyway. His mother came down in a hired 
auto,in a fur suit like an arctic explorer's, and saw him off in a twenty-five 
mile wind and a steady drove of ice floes like dirty sheep. Ever since then I 
have believed that Godis not onlya gentleman and a sport; he isa 
Kentuckian too. When he sailed away she made a detour and came down to 
the river again and drove along parallel with him, the car in low gear. They 
said you couldn't have told they'd ever seen one another before, like a Kingand Queen, noteven looking at one another, just moving side by side 
across Massachusetts on parallel courses like a couple of planets.

 He got in and pulled away.He pulled pretty well now. He ought to. They 
said his mother tried to make him give rowing upand dosomethingelse 
the rest of his class couldn't or wouldn't do, but for once he was stubborn. 
If you could call it stubbornness, sittingin his attitudes of princely 
boredom, with his curly yellow hair and his violet eyes and his eyelashes 
and his New York clothes, while his mamma was telling us aboutGerald'shorses and Gerald's niggers and Gerald's women. Husbands and fathers inKentucky must have been awful glad when she carried Gerald off to 
Cambridge. She had an apartmentover in town, and Gerald had one there 
too, besides his rooms in college. She approved of Gerald associatingwith 
me because I at least revealed a blundering sense ofnoblesse oblige by 
getting myself born below Mason and Dixon,and afew others whose 
Geography met the requirements (minimum). Forgave, at least. Or 
condoned. But since she met Spoade coming out of chapel one He said she 
couldn't be a ladyno lady would be out at that hour of the night she never 
had been able to forgive him for havingfive names, including that of a 
presentEnglish ducal house. I'm sure she solaced herself by being 
convinced that some misfit Maingault or Mortemar had got mixed up with 
the lodge-keeper's daughter. Which was quite probable, whether she 
invented it or not. Spoade was the world's champion sitter-around,no 
holds barred and gouging discretionary.

 The shell was a speck now, the oars catching the sun in spaced glints, as 
if the hull were winking itselfalong him along. Did you ever have a sister, 
No but they're all bitches. Did you ever have a sister? One minute she was. 


Bitches. Not bitch one minute she stood in the door Dalton Ames.Dalton 
Ames. Dalton Shirts. I thought allthe time they were khaki, army issue 
khaki, until I saw they were of heavy Chinese silk or finest flannel because 
they made his face so brown his eyes so blue. Dalton Ames. It just missed 
gentility. Theatrical fixture. Just papier-mache, then touch. Oh.Asbestos. 
Not quite bronze. But wont see him at the house. 

Caddy's a woman too remember. She must do things for women's 
reasons too.

Why wont you bring him to the house, Caddy? Why must you do like 
nigger women do in the pasture the ditches the dark woods hot hidden 
furious in the dark woods.

 And after a while I hadbeen hearing my watch for some time andI 
could feel the letters crackle through my coat, against the railing,and I 
leaned on the railing, watching my shadow, how I had tricked it. I moved 
along the rail,but my suit was dark too and I could wipe my hands, 
watchingmy shadow, how I had tricked it. I walked it into the shadow of 
the quad. Then I went east.

Harvard my Harvard boy Harvard harvard That pimple-faced infant 
she met at the field-meet with colored ribbons. Skulkingalong the fence 
trying to whistle her out like a puppy. Because they couldn't cajole him into 
the diningroom Mother believed he had some sort of spell he was going to 
cast on her when he got her alone.Yet any blackguard He was lyingbeside the box under the window bellowing that could drive up in a 
limousine with a flower in his buttonhole. Harvard. Quentin this isHerbert. My Harvard boy. Herbert will be a big brother has already 
promised Jason

 Hearty, celluloid like a drummer. Face full of teeth white but not 
smiling. I've heard of him up there. All teeth butnot smiling. You going to 
drive?

Get in Quentin.

You going to drive. 

It's her car aren't you proud of your little sister owns first auto in town 
Herbert his present. Louis has been giving her lessons every morning 
didn't you get my letter Mr andMrs Jason Richmond Compson 
announce the marriage of their daughter Candace to Mr SydneyHerbert 


Head on the twenty-fifth of April one thousandnine hundred and ten at 
Jefferson Mississippi. At home after the first of Augustnumber SomethingSomething Avenue SouthBend Indiana. Shreve said Aren't you even goingto open it? Three days. Times. Mr and Mrs Jason Richmond Compson 
Young Lochinvar rode out of the west a little too soon, didn't he?

I'm from the south. You're funny, aren't you.

 O yes I knew it was somewhere in the country.

 You're funny, aren't you. You ought to join the circus.

 I did. That's how I ruined my eyes watering the elephant's fleas. Three 
times These country girls. You cant ever tell about them, can you.Well,
anyway Byron never had his wish,thank God. But not hit a man in 
glasses Aren't you even going toopen it? It lay on the table a candleburning at each corner upon the envelope tied in a soiled pink garter two 
artificial flowers. Not hit a man in glasses.

 Country people poor things they never saw an autobefore lots of them 
honk the horn Candace so She wouldn't look at me they'll get outof the 
way wouldn't look at me your father wouldn't like itif you were to 
injure one of them I'll declare your father will simply have to get an auto 
now I'm almost sorry you broughtit down Herbert I've enjoyed it somuch 
of course there's the carriage but so often when I'd like to go out Mr 
Compson has the darkies doing somethingit wouldbe worth my head to 
interrupt he insists that Roskus isat my call all the time but Iknowwhat 
that means I know how often people make promises just to satisfy their 
consciences are you going to treat my little baby girl that wayHerbert but I 
know you wontHerbert has spoiled us all to death Quentin did I write you 
that he is going to take Jason intohis bank when Jason finishes high 
school Jason will make a splendid banker he is the only one of my children 
with any practical sense you can thankme for that he takesafter my peoplethe others are all Compson Jason furnished the flour. They made kites on 
the back porch and sold them for a nickel a piece, he and the Patterson 
boy. Jason was treasurer.

 There was no nigger in this car,and the hatsunbleached as yet flowingpast under the window. Going toHarvard. We have sold Benjy's He lay 
on the ground under the window, bellowing. We have sold Benjy'spasture so that Quentin may go to Harvard a brother to you. Yourlittle 


brother.

 You should have a car it's done you no end of good dont you thinkso 
Quentin I call him Quentin at once you see I have heard so muchabout 
him from Candace.

 Why shouldn't you I want myboys to be more than friends yes Candace 
and Quentin more than friends Father I have committed what a pity 
you hadno brother or sister No sister no sister had no sister Dont ask 
Quentin he and Mr Compson both feel a little insulted when I am strong 
enough to come down to the table I am going on nerve now I'll pay for itafter it's all over and youhave taken my little daughter away from me My 
little sister had no. If I could say Mother. Mother

 Unless I do what I am tempted to and take you instead I dont think Mr 
Compson could overtake the car.

 Ah Herbert Candace do you hear that She wouldn't look at me soft 
stubborn jaw-angle not back-looking Youneedn't be jealous though it'sjustan old woman he's flattering a grown married daughter I cantbelieve 
it.

 Nonsense you look likea girl you are lots younger than Candace color inyour cheeks like a girl A face reproachful tearful an odor of camphor and 
of tears a voice weeping steadily and softly beyond the twilit door the 
twilight-colored smell of honeysuckle. Bringing empty trunks down the 
attic stairs they sounded like coffins French Lick. Found not death at the 
salt lick

 Hats notunbleached and not hats. In three years I can not wear a hat. I 
could not. Was. Will there be hatsthen since I was notand not Harvardthen. Where the best of thought Father said clings like dead ivy vinesupon 
old dead brick. Not Harvard then.Not to me, anyway. Again.Sadder than 
was. Again.Saddest of all. Again.

 Spoade had a shirt on; then it must be. When I can see myshadowagainifnot careful that I tricked into the water shall tread again upon my 
imperviousshadow. But nosister.I wouldn't have done it. I wont have 
my daughter spied on I wouldn't have. 

How can I control any of them when you have always taught them to 
have no respect for me and my wishes I know you look down on my 
people but is that any reason for teaching my children my own children I 


suffered for to have no respect Tramplingmy shadow's bonesintothe 
concrete with hard heels and then I was hearing the watch, and I touched 
the letters through my coat.

I will not have my daughter spied on by you or Quentin or anybody no 
matter what you think she has done 

At least you agree there is reason for having her watched

 I wouldn't have I wouldn't have.I know you wouldn't I didn't mean to 
speak so sharply but have no respect for each other for themselves 

But why did she The chimes began as I stepped on my shadow,but itwas the quarter hour. The Deacon wasn't in sight anywhere. think I wouldhave could have

 She didn't mean that that's the way women do things it's because she 
loves Caddy

 The street lamps would go down the hill then rise toward town I 
walked upon the belly of my shadow. I could extend my hand beyond it. 
feeling Father behind me beyond the rasping darkness of summer and 
August the street lamps Father and I protect women from one anotherfrom themselves our women Women are like that they dont acquire 
knowledge of people we are for that they are just born with a practicalfertility of suspicion that makes a crop every so often and usually right 
they have an affinity for evil for supplying whatever the evil lacks in itself 
for drawing it about them instinctively as you do bed-clothing in slumber 
fertilising the mind for it until the evil has served its purpose whether it 
ever existed or no He was coming alongbetween a couple of freshmen. 
He hadn't quite recovered from the parade, for he gave me a salute, a very 
superior-officerish kind.

 "I want to see youa minute," I said, stopping.

 "See me? All right. See you again, fellows," he said, stopping and turning 
back;"glad to have chatted with you." That was the Deacon,all over. Talkabout your natural psychologists.They said he hadn't missed a train at the 
beginning of school in forty years,and that he could pick outa Southerner 
with one glance. He never missed, and once he had heard you speak,he 
could name your state.He had a regular uniform he met trains in, a sort of 
Uncle Tom's cabin outfit, patchesand all.

 "Yes, suh. Right dis way, youngmarster, hyer we is," taking your bags. 


"Hyer,boy, come hyer and git dese grips." Whereupon a moving mountainof luggage would edge up, revealing a white boy of about fifteen, and the 
Deacon would hang another bag on him somehow and drive him off. "Now, 
den, dont you crap hit. Yes, suh, youngmarster, jes give de old nigger yo 
room number, and hit'll be done got cold afar when youarrives."

 From then on until he had you completely subjugated he was always inor out of your room, ubiquitous and garrulous, though his manner 
gradually moved northward ashisraimentimproved, until at last when he 
had bled youuntil you began to learn better he was calling you Quentin or 
whatever, and when you saw him next he'd be wearinga cast-off Brooks 
suitand a hat witha Princeton club I forget which band that someone had 
given him and which he was pleasantly and unshakably convinced was a 
part of Abe Lincoln's military sash. Someone spread the story years ago, 
when he first appeared around college from wherever he came from, that 
he was a graduate of the divinity school. And when he came tounderstand 
what it meant he was so taken with it that he began to retail the story 
himself,until at lasthe must have come to believe he really had. Anyway he 
related long pointless anecdotes of his undergraduate days,speakingfamiliarly of dead and departed professors by their first names,usuallyincorrect ones. Buthe had been guide mentor and friend to unnumbered 
crops of innocent and lonely freshmen, and I suppose that with all his petty 
chicanery and hypocrisy he stankno higher in heaven's nostrils than any 
other.

 "Haven't seen youin three-four days," he said, staring atme from his 
still military aura. "Youbeen sick?"

 "No. I've been all right. Working, I reckon. I've seen you, though."

 "Yes?"

 "In the parade the other day."

 "Oh, that. Yes, I was there. I dont care nothing about that sort of thing, 
youunderstand, but the boys likesto have me with them, the vet'runs does. 
Ladies wantsall the old vet'runs to turn out, youknow.So I has to oblige 
them."

 "And on that Wop holiday too,"I said. "You were obliging the W. C. T. 

U.then, I reckon." 
"That? I was doing thatfor my son-in-law.He aims to get a job on the 

city forces. Street cleaner. I tells him all he wantsis abroom to sleep on. 

You saw me, did you?"

 "Both times. Yes."

 "I mean,in uniform.How'd I look?"

 "You looked fine. You looked better than any of them. They oughtto 
make you a general, Deacon."

 He touched my arm, lightly, hishand that worn, gentle quality of 
niggers' hands. "Listen. This aint for outside talking. I dont mind tellingyoubecause you and me's the same folks, come long and short."He leaned 
a little to me, speaking rapidly, his eyes not looking at me."I've got strings 
out, rightnow. Wait till next year. Just wait. Then see where I'm marching. 
I wont need to tell you how I'm fixing it; I say, just wait and see, my boy." 
He looked at me now and clapped me lightly on the shoulder and rocked 
back on his heels, nodding at me. "Yes, sir. I didn't turn Democrat three 
years ago for nothing. My son-in-law on the city; me-- Yes, sir. If just 
turning Democrat'll make that son of a bitch go to work.... And me:just you 
stand on that corner yonder a year from two days ago, and see."

 "I hope so. You deserve it, Deacon. And while I think about it--" I took 
the letter from my pocket. "Take this around to my room tomorrow and 
give it to Shreve. He'll have somethingfor you.Butnot tilltomorrow,mind."

 He took the letter and examined it. "It's sealed up."

 "Yes. And it's written inside, Not good until tomorrow."

 "H'm,"he said.He looked atthe envelope, his mouth pursed. 
"Something for me, you say?"

 "Yes. A present I'm making you."

 He was looking at me now, the envelope white in his black hand, in the 
sun. His eyes were soft and irisless and brown, and suddenly I saw Roskus 
watchingme from behind all his whitefolks' claptrap ofuniformsand 
politics and Harvard manner, diffident, secret, inarticulate and sad. "You 
aint playing ajoke on the old nigger, is you?"

 "You know I'm not. Did anySoutherner ever play a joke on you?"

 "You're right. They're fine folks. But you cant live with them."

 "Did you ever try?" I said. But Roskus was gone.Once more he was that 
self he had long since taught himself to 


 "I'll confer to your wishes, myboy."

 "Not until tomorrow, remember."

 "Sure," he said;"understood, my boy. Well--"

 "I hope--" I said. He looked down at me, benignant, profound.SuddenlyI held out my hand and we shook, he gravely, from the pompous height ofhis municipaland military dream."You're a good fellow, Deacon. I hope.... 
You've helped a lot of youngfellows, here and there."

 "I've tried to treat all folks right," he said."I draw no petty social lines. A 
man tome is a man, wherever I find him."

 "I hope you'll alwaysfind as many friends as you've made."

 "Young fellows. I get along with them. They dont forget me, neither," he 
said, waving the envelope. He put it into his pocket and buttoned hiscoat. 
"Yes, sir,"he said."I've had good friends."

 The chimes began again, the half hour. I stood in the belly ofmy shadow 
and listened to the strokes spaced and tranquil along the sunlight, among 
the thin, still little leaves. Spaced and peaceful and serene, with thatquality 
of autumn always in bells even in the month ofbrides. Lying on the 
ground under the window bellowing He took one look at her and knew. 
Out of the mouths of babes. The street lamps The chimes ceased. Iwent 
back to the postoffice, treadingmy shadow into pavement. go down the hillthen they rise toward town like lanterns hung one above another on a 
wall. Father said because she loves Caddy she loves people through their 
shortcomings. Uncle Maury straddling his legs before the fire must remove 
one hand long enough to drink Christmas.Jason ran on, his handsin hispockets fell down and lay there like a trussed fowl until Versh set him up.
Whyn't you keep them hands outen your pockets when you running youcould stand up then Rolling his head in the cradle rolling it flat across the 
back. Caddy told Jason and Vershthat the reason Uncle Maury didn't work 
was that he used to roll his head in the cradle when he was little.

 Shreve was comingup the walk, shambling, fatly earnest, his glasses 
glintingbeneath the running leaves like little pools.

 "I gave Deacon anote for some things. I maynotbe in this afternoon, so 
dont you let him have anythinguntil tomorrow, will you?"

 "All right."He looked at me. "Say, what're you doing today, anyhow? Alldressed up and mooningaround like the prologue to a suttee. Did you go to 


Psychology this morning?"

 "I'm not doing anything. Notuntil tomorrow, now."

 "What's that you got there?"

 "Nothing.Pair of shoes I had half-soled. Not until tomorrow, youhear?"

 "Sure. All right.Oh,by the way,did you get a letter off the table thismorning?"

 "No."

 "It's there. From Semiramis. Chauffeur broughtit before ten oclock."

 "All right. I'll get it. Wonder what she wantsnow."

 "Another band recital, I guess.Tumpty ta taGerald blah. 'A little louder 
on the drum, Quentin'.God, I'm glad I'm not a gentleman."He went on, 
nursinga book, a little shapeless, fatly intent. The street lamps do you 
think so because one of our forefathers was a governor and three were 
generals and Mother's weren't

 any live man is better than anydead man butno live or dead man is very 
much better than any other live or dead man Done in Mother's mind 
though. Finished. Finished. Then we were all poisoned you are confusingsin and morality women dont do that your mother is thinking of morality 
whether it be sin ornot hasnot occurred to her

 Jason Imust goaway you keepthe others I'll take Jason and go where 
nobodyknowsus so he'll have a chance to grow up and forget all thisthe 
others dont love me they have never loved anything with that streak of 
Compson selfishness and false pride Jason was the only one my heart went 
out to without dread

 nonsense Jason is all right I was thinking thatas soon as you feelbetteryou and Caddy might go up to French Lick

 and leave Jason here with nobody but you and the darkies

 she will forget him then all the talk will die away found not death at 
the salt licks

maybe I could find a husband for her not death at the salt licks

 The car came up and stopped. The bells were still ring ing the halfhour. 
I got on and it went on again,blotting the half hour. No: the three quarters. 
Then it would be ten minutes anyway. To leave Harvard your mother'sdream for sold Benjy's pasture for

 what have I done to have been given children like these Benjamin was 


punishment enough and now for her to have no more regard for me herown mother I've suffered for her dreamed and planned and sacrificed I 
went down into the valley yet never since she opened her eyes has she 
given me one unselfish thought attimes I look at her I wonder if she can be 
my child except Jason he hasnever given me one moment's sorrow since I 
first held himin myarms I knew then that he was tobe myjoy and my 
salvation I thought that Benjamin was punishment enoughfor any sins I 
have committed I thought he wasmy punishment for putting aside my 
pride and marrying a man who held himself above me I dont complain Iloved him above all of them because of it because my duty though Jason 
pulling at my heart all the while but I see now that I have not sufferedenough I see now that I must payfor your sins as well as mine what have 
you done whatsins have your high and mighty people visited upon me but 
you'll take upfor them youalwayshave found excuses for your own bloodonly Jason can do wrongbecause he is more Bascomb than Compson whileyour own daughter my little daughter my baby girl she isshe isno better 
than that when I wasa girl I wasunfortunate I was onlya Bascomb Iwas 
taught that there is nohalfway ground that a woman is either a ladyor not 
but Inever dreamed when I held her in my arms that any daughter of mine 
could let herself dont you know I can lookat her eyes and tell you may 
think she'd tell you but she doesn't tell things she is secretive you dont 
know her I know things she's done that I'd die before I'd have you know 
that's it go on criticise Jason accuse me of setting him to watch her asif it 
were a crime while your own daughter can I know you dont love him that 
you wish to believe faultsagainst him you never have yes ridicule him as 
you always have Maury you cannot hurt me any more than your children 
already have and then I'll be gone and Jason with no one to love him shield 
him from this I lookat him every day dreading to see thisCompson blood 
beginning to show in him at last with hissister slipping out to see what do 
you call it then have you ever laid eyes on him will you even let me try to 
find out who he isit's not for myself I couldn't bear to see himit's foryour 
sake to protect you but who can fight againstbadblood you wont let me try 
we are to sit back with our hands folded while she not only drags your 
name in the dirt but corrupts the very air your children breathe Jason you 
must let me go away I cannot stand it let me have Jason and you keep the 


others they're not my flesh andblood like he is strangers nothing ofmineand I am afraid of them I can take Jason and go where we are not known 
I'll go down on my knees and prayfor the absolution of my sins thathe 
may escape this curse try to forget that the others ever were

 If that was the three quarters, not over ten minutes now. One carhad 
just left,and people were already waiting for the next one. I asked, but he 
didn't know whether another one would leave before noon ornot because 
you'd think thatinterurbans.So the first one was another trolley. I got on. 
You can feel noon. I wonder if even miners in the bowels ofthe earth. 
That's why whistles:because people that sweat, andif just far enough from 
sweat you wont hear whistles and in eight minutes you should be that far 
from sweat in Boston. Father saida man is the sum of hismisfortunes. One 
day you'd think misfortune would get tired, but then time is your 
misfortune Father said. A gull on an invisible wire attached through space 
dragged. You carry the symbol of your frustration into eternity. Then the 
wingsare bigger Father said onlywho can playa harp.

 I could hear my watch whenever the car stopped, but not often they 
were already eating Who would play a Eating the business of eating 
inside of youspace too space and time confused Stomach saying noon 
brain saying eat oclock All right Iwonder what time it is what ofit. People 
were getting out. The trolley didn't stop so often now, emptied by eating.

 Then it was past. I got off and stood in my shadow and after a while a 
car came along and I got on and went back to the interurban station. There 
was a car ready to leave, and I found a seatnext the window and it started 
and I watched it sort of frazzle outinto slack tide flats,and then trees. Now 
and then I saw the river and I thought how nice it would be for them down 
at New London if the weather and Gerald's shell going solemnlyup the 
glinting forenoon and I wondered what the old woman would be wantingnow, sending me anote before ten oclock in the morning. What picture of 
Gerald I to be one of the Dalton Ames oh asbestos Quentin has shot 
background. Something with girlsin it. Women do have always his voice 
above the gabble voice that breathed an affinity for evil, for believingthat no woman is tobe trusted, but that some men are too innocent to 
protect themselves. Plain girls. Remote cousins and family friends whom 
mere acquaintanceship invested with a sort ofblood obligation noblesse 


oblige. And she sitting there telling us before their faces what a shame it 
was thatGerald should have all the family looks because a man didn't need 
it, was better off without it but without ita girl was simply lost. Telling us 
about Gerald's women in a Quentin has shot Herbert he shot his voice 
through the floor of Caddy's room tone of smug approbation. "When he 
was seventeen I said to him one day 'What a shame that you should have a 
mouth like thatit should be on a girl's face' and can youimagine the 
curtains leaning in on the twilight upon the odor of the apple tree her 
head against the twilight her arms behind her head kimono-winged the 
voice that breathed o'er eden clothes upon the bed by the nose seen above 
the apple what he said? just seventeen, mind. 'Mother' he said 'it often 
is'." And him sitting there in attitudes regal watching two or three of them 
through his eyelashes. They gushed like swallows swooping his eyelashes. 
Shreve said he always had Are you going to look after Benjy and Father

The less you say about Benjy and Father the better when have you everconsidered them Caddy

Promise

You needn't worry about them you're getting out in good shape 

Promise I'm sick you'll have to promise wondered who invented that 
joke but then he always had considered Mrs Bland a remarkably preserved 
woman he said she was groomingGerald to seduce a duchess sometime.
She called Shreve that fat Canadian youth twice she arranged anew roommate 
for me without consulting me at all, once for me to move out, once 
for

 He opened the door in the twilight. His face looked like a pumpkin pie.

 "Well, I'll say a fond farewell. Cruel fate may part us,but I will never 
love another. Never."

 "What are you talking about?"

 "I'm talking about cruel fate in eight yards of apricot silk and more 
metal pound for pound than a galley slave and the sole ownerand 
proprietor of the unchallenged peripatetic john of the late Confederacy." 
Then he told me how she had gone to the proctor to have him moved out 
and how the proctor had revealed enough low stubbornness toinsiston 
consultingShreve first. Then she suggested that he send for Shreve right 
off and do it, and he wouldn't do that, so after thatshe was hardly civil to 


Shreve. "I make it a point never to speak harshly of females," Shreve said, 
"but that woman has gotmore ways like abitch than any ladyin these 
sovereign states and dominions." and now Letter on the table by hand, 
command orchid scented colored If she knew I had passed almostbeneath 
the window knowingit there without My dear Madam Ihave not yethad 
an opportunity of receiving your communication but I begin advance to be 
excused today or yesterday and tomorrow or when As I remember that the 
next one is to be howGerald throws hisnigger downstairs and how the 
nigger plead to be allowed to matriculate in the divinity school tobe near 
marster marse gerald and How he ran all the way to the station beside the 
carriage with tears in his eyes when marse gerald rid away I will wait untilthe day for the one about the sawmill husband came to the kitchen door 
with a shotgun Gerald went down and bit the gun in two and handed itback and wiped his hands on a silk handkerchief threw the handkerchief inthe stove I've only heard that one twice 

shot him through the I saw you come in here so I watched my chance 
and came along thought we mightgetacquainted have a cigar 
Thanks I dont smokeNo thingsmusthave changed up there since my day mind if I lightup 
Help yourselfThanks I've heard a lot I guessyour mother wont mind if I put the match 
behind the screen will she a lot about you Candace talked about youall the 
time up there at the Licks I got pretty jealous I says to myself whois thisQuentin anyway I must see what this animal looks like because I was hitpretty hard see soon as I saw the little girl I dont mind telling you it never 
occurred to me it was her brother she kept talking about she couldn't have 
talked about you any more if you'd been the onlyman in the worldhusband wouldn't have been in it you wont change your mind and have a 
smokeI dont smokeIn that case I wont insist even though itis a pretty fair weed cost me 
twenty-five bucksa hundred wholesale friend of in Havana yes I guess 
there are lots of changes up there I keep promisingmyself a visitbut I 
never get around to itbeen hittingthe ball nowfor ten yearsI cant get 
away from the bank during schoolfellow's habits change things that seem 


important toan undergraduate you know tell me about thingsup there 
I'm not going to tell Father and Mother if that's what you are gettingat 
Not going to tell not going to oh that that's what you are talkingabout is ityouunderstand that I dont give a damn whether you tell or notunderstand 
that a thing like thatunfortunate but no police crime I wasn't the first or 
the last I was justunlucky you might have been luckierYou lieKeep your shirt on I'm not trying to make you tell anything you dontwant 
to meantno offense of course a youngfellow like you would consider a 
thing of that sort a lot more serious than you willin five years 
I dont knowbut one way to consider cheating I dont think I'm likely to 
learn different atHarvardWe're better than a play youmusthave made the Dramat well you're right 
no need to tell them we'll let bygones be bygones eh no reason why you and 
I should let a little thing like that come between us I like youQuentin I like 
your appearance you dont look like these other hicks I'm glad we're goingto hit it off like this I've promised your mother to do something for Jason 
but I would like to give you a hand too Jason wouldbe just as well off here 
but there's no future in a hole like this for a young fellow like you 
Thanksyou'd better stick toJason he'd suit youbetter than I wouldI'm sorry about thatbusiness but a kid like I was then I never had amother 
like yours to teach me the finer points it would just hurt her unnecessarilyto know it yes you're right noneed to that includes Candace of course 
I said Mother and FatherLook here take a look at me how long do you think you'd last with me 
I wont have to last long ifyou learned to fightup at school too try and see 
how long I wouldYou damned little what do you think you're getting at 
Try and seeMy God the cigar what would your mother say if she found ablister on her 
mantel justin time too look here Quentin we're about to do something we'llboth regret I like you liked you as soon as I saw you Isays he mustbe a 
damned good fellow whoever he is or Candace wouldn't be sokeen on himlisten I've been out in the world now for ten years things dont matter so 
much then you'll find that out let's you and I get together on this thing sons 


of old Harvard and all I guess I wouldn't know the place now best place for 
a young fellow in the world I'm going to send my sons there give them a 
better chance than Ihad wait dont go yet let's discuss this thing a young 
man gets these ideas and I'm all for them does him good while he's inschool forms his character good for tradition the schoolbut when he gets 
out into the world he'll have to get his the best way he can because he'llfind that everybody else is doing the same thing and be damned to here 
let's shake hands and let bygonesbe bygones for your mother's sake 
remember her health come on give me your hand here look at it it's just out 
of convent looknot ablemish noteven been creased yet see here 
To hell with your moneyNo no come on I belong to the family now see I know how it is with ayoung 
fellow he has lots of private affairsit's always pretty hard to get the old man 
to stumpup for I know haven't I been there and not so long ago either but 
now I'm gettingmarried and all specially up there come on dontbe afoollisten when we get a chance for a real talk I want to tell you about a little 
widow over in town 
I've heard that too keep your damned moneyCall it a loan then just shut your eyes a minute and you'll be fifty 
Keep your hands off of me you'd better get that cigar off the mantel 
Tell and be damned then see what it gets youif you were not a damned fool 
you'd have seen that I've got them too tight for any half-baked Galahad of a 
brother your mother's told me about your sort withyour head swelled up 
come in oh come in dear Quentin and I were just getting acquainted talkingabout Harvard did you want me cant stayaway from the old man can she 
Goouta minute Herbert I want totalk to QuentinCome in come in let's all have a gabfest and get acquainted I wasjust 
telling Quentin Go on Herbert go out a while Well all right then I suppose 
you and bubber do want to see one another once more ehYou'd better take that cigar off the mantel 
Right asusual my boy then I'll toddle along let them order you around 
while they can Quentin after day after tomorrow it'll be pretty please to the 
old man wontit dear give usa kisshoneyOh stop that save that for dayafter tomorrowI'll want interest then dont let Quentin do anything he cantfinish ohby the 


way did I tell Quentin the storyabout the man's parrot and whathappened 
to it a sad story remind me of thatthink of it yourself ta-ta see youin the 
funnypaperWellWellWhat are youup to nowNothingYou're meddling in my businessagain didn't you get enough of that last 
summerCaddy you've got fever You're sick how are you sick 

I'm just sick. I cant ask. 

Shot his voice through the

 Not that blackguard Caddy

 Now and then the river glinted beyond things in sort of swoopingglints,
across noon and after. Good after now, though we had passed where he 
was still pullingupstream majestical in the face of god gods. Better. Gods. 
God would be canaille too in Boston in Massachusetts. Or maybe just not a 
husband. The wet oars winking him alongin bright winks and female 
palms. Adulant.Adulant if nota husband he'd ignore God. That 
blackguard, Caddy The river glinted awaybeyond a swooping curve. 

I'm sick you'll have to promise 

Sick how are you sick 

I'm just sick I cant ask anybody yet promise you will

If they need any looking after it's because of you how are you sick 
Under the window we could hear the car leaving for the station, the 8:10 
train. Tobringback cousins.Heads. Increasing himself head by head but 
not barbers. Manicure girls. We had a blood horse once. In the stable yes, 
butunder leather a cur. Quentin has shot all of their voices through the 
floor of Caddy's room

 The car stopped. I got off, into the middle of my shadow. A road crossed 
the track. There was a wooden marquee with an old man eating somethingout of a paper bag, and then the car was out of hearing too. The roadwent 
into trees, where it would be shady, butJune foliage in New Englandnot 
much thicker than Aprilat home. I could see a smoke stack. I turned my 
back to it, tramping my shadow into the dust. There was something 


terrible in me sometimes at night I could see it grinning at me I could see 
it through them grinning at me through their faces it's gone now and I'm 
sick

Caddy

Dont touch me just promise 

If you're sick you cant

Yes I can after that it'll be all right it wont matter dont let them send 
him to Jackson promise

I promise Caddy Caddy

Dont touch me dont touch me

What does it look like Caddy 

What

That that grins at you that thing through them

 I could still see the smoke stack. That's where the water would be, 
healing out to the seaand the peaceful grottoes. Tumbling peacefullythey 
would, and when He said Rise only the flat irons. When Versh and Ihunted 
all day we wouldn't take any lunch, and at twelve oclock I'd get hungry. I'dstay hungryuntil about one, then all of a sudden I'd even forget that I 
wasn't hungry anymore. The street lamps go down the hill then heard the 
car go down the hill. The chair-arm flat cool smooth under my forehead 
shaping the chair the apple tree leaning on my hair above the eden clothes 
by the nose seen You've got fever I felt it yesterday it's like beingnear a 
stove.

 Dont touch me.

 Caddy you cant do itif you are sick. That blackguard.

I've got to marry somebody.Then they told me the bone would have to 
be broken again

 At last I couldn't see the smoke stack. The road went beside a wall. Trees 
leaned over the wall, sprayed with sunlight. The stone was cool. Walkingnear it you could feel the coolness. Only our country was not like thiscountry. There was something about just walking throughit. A kindof stilland violentfecundity that satisfied even bread-hunger like. Flowingaround you,not brooding and nursing every niggard stone. Like it were put 
to makeshift for enoughgreen to go around among the trees and even the 
blue of distance not that rich chimaera. told me the bone would have to 


be broken again and inside me it began to say Ah Ah Ah and I began tosweat. What do I care I know what a broken leg is all it is it wont be 
anything I'll just have to stay in the house a little longer that's all and my 
jaw-muscles getting numb and my mouth saying Wait Wait just a minute 
through the sweat ah ah ah behind my teeth and Father damn that horse 
damn that horse. Wait it's my fault. He came along the fence every 
morning with a basket toward the kitchen dragging a stick along the 
fence every morning I dragged myself to the window cast and all and laidfor him with a piece of coal Dilsey said you goin to ruin yoself aint you 
got no mo sense than that not fo days since you bruck hit. Wait I'll get 
used to it in a minute wait just a minute I'll get

 Even sound seemed to fail in this air, like the air was worn out with 
carrying sounds so long. A dog's voice carries further than a train, in the 
darkness anyway. And some people's. Niggers. Louis Hatcher never even 
used his horn carryingit and thatold lantern. I said, "Louis, when was the 
last time you cleaned that lantern?"

 "I cleant hit a little while back.You member when all dat flood-watter 
wash dem folks away upyonder? I cleans hit dat ve'y day. Old woman and 
me settin fo de fire datnightand she say 'Louis, whut you gwine do ef dat 
flood git out dis fur?' and I say 'Dat's a fack. I reckon I hadbetter clean dat 
lantun up.' So I cleant hit datnight."

 "That flood was wayup in Pennsylvania," I said. "It couldn't ever have 
got down this far."

 "Dat's whut you says," Louis said. "Watter kin git des ez high en wet inJefferson ezhit kinin Pennsylvaney, I reckon. Hit's de folks datsaysde 
high watter cant git dis fur dat comes floatin out on de ridge-pole, too."

 "Did youand Martha get out that night?"

 "We done jest cat. I cleans dat lantun and me and her sot de balance of 
de night on top o datknollback de graveyard. En ef I'd a knowed of aihy 
one higher, we'd a been on hit instead."

 "And you haven't cleaned that lantern since then."

 "Whut I want to clean hit when dey aintno need?"

 "You mean,until another flood comes along?"

 "Hitkep us outen datun."

 "Oh, come on,Uncle Louis," Isaid. 


 "Yes, suh. You do yo way en I do mine.Ef all I got to do to keep outen de 
high watter is to clean dis yere lantun, I wont quoil wid no man."

 "Unc' Louis wouldn't ketch nothin wid a light he could see by,"Versh 
said.

 "I wuz huntin possums in dis country when dey was still drowndin nits 
in yo pappy's head wid coal oil, boy," Louis said. "Ketchin um, too."

 "Dat's de troof," Versh said. "I reckon Unc' Louis done caught mo 
possums than aihy man in dis country."

 "Yes, suh," Louis said. "I got plenty lightfer possums to see, all right. I 
aint heard none o dem complainin. Hush, now. Dar he. Whooey. Hum 
awn, dawg."And we'd sit in the dry leaves that whispered a little with the 
slow respiration of our waiting and with the slow breathing of the earth 
and the windless October, the rank smell of the lantern fouling the brittle 
air, listening to the dogs and to the echo of Louis' voice dying away.He 
never raised it, yet on a still nightwe have heard it from our front porch. 
When he called the dogs in he sounded just like the horn he carried slung 
on hisshoulder and never used, but clearer, mellower, as though his voice 
were a part of darkness and silence, coiling out of it, coiling into it again.
WhoOoooo. WhoOoooo. WhoOooooooooooooooo.Got to marry somebody 

Have there been very many Caddy

I dont know too many will you look after Benjy and Father 

You dont know whose it is then does he know 

Dont touch me will you look after Benjy and Father

 I began to feel the water before I came to the bridge. The bridge was of 
gray stone, lichened, dappled with slow moisture where the fungus crept. 
Beneathit the water was clear andstillin the shadow, whispering and 
cluckingabout the stone in fadingswirls of spinning sky. Caddy that 

I've got to marry somebody Versh told me abouta man who mutilated 
himself.He went into the woods and did it with a razor, sittingin a ditch. A 
broken razor flinging them backward over his shoulder the same motion 
complete the jerked skein of blood backward not looping.But that'snot it. 
It's not not having them. It's never to have had them then I could sayO 
That That's Chinese I dont know Chinese. And Father said it's because you 
are a virgin: dont you see? Women are never virgins. Purityis anegative 
state and therefore contrary to nature. It's nature is hurting younotCaddy 


and I said That's just words and he said Sois virginity and I said youdont 
know. You cant know and he said Yes. On the instant when we come to 
realise that tragedy is second-hand.

 Where the shadow of the bridge fell I could see down for a long way, but 
not as far as the bottom. When you leave a leaf in water a longtime after a 
while the tissue will be gone and the delicate fibers waving slow as the 
motion of sleep. They dont touch one another, no matter how knotted upthey once were, no matter how close they lay once to the bones. And maybe 
when He says Rise the eyes will come floating up too, out of the deep quietand the sleep, to look on glory. And after a while the flat irons wouldcome 
floating up. I hid them under the end of the bridge and went back and 
leaned on the rail.

 I could not see the bottom, but I could see a long way into the motion of 
the water before the eye gave out, and then I saw a shadow hanging like a 
fat arrow stemming into the current. Mayflies skimmed in and out of the 
shadow of the bridge justabove the surface. If it could just be a hell beyond 
that: the clean flame the two of us more than dead. Then you will have 
only me then only me then the two of us amid the pointing and the horror 
beyond the clean flame The arrow increased without motion, then in a 
quick swirl the trout lipped afly beneath the surface with that sort of 
gigantic delicacy of an elephant pickingup a peanut. The fading vortex 
drifted away down stream and then I saw the arrow again,nose intothe 
current, wavering delicately to the motion of the water above which the 
May fliesslanted and poised. Only you and me then amid the pointing and 
the horror walled by the clean flame

 The trout hung, delicate and motionlessamong the wavering shadows. 
Three boys with fishing poles came onto the bridge and we leaned on the 
rail and looked down at the trout.They knew the fish.He wasa 
neighborhood character.

 "They've been trying to catch that trout for twenty-five years. There's a 
store in Boston offers a twenty-five dollar fishing rod to anybody that can 
catch him."

 "Why dont you all catch him, then? Wouldn't you like to have a twenty-
five dollar fishing rod?"

 "Yes," they said. They leaned on the rail, looking down at the trout. "I 


sure would," one said.

 "I wouldn't take the rod," the second said. "I'd take the money instead."

 "Maybe they wouldn't do that,"the first said. "I bet he'd make youtake 
the rod."

 "Then I'd sell it."

 "You couldn't get twenty-five dollars for it."

 "I'd take what I could get, then.I can catch just as many fish with this 
pole as I could with a twenty-five dollar one." Then they talked aboutwhat 
they would do with twenty-five dollars. They all talked at once, theirvoices 
insistentand contradictory and impatient, making of unrealitya 
possibility, then a probability, then an incontrovertible fact, as people willwhen their desires become words.

 "I'd buy a horse and wagon," the second said.

 "Yes you would," the others said.

 "I would. I know where I can buy one for twenty-five dollars. I know the 
man."

 "Who is it?"

 "That's all right who itis. I can buy it for twenty-five dollars."

 "Yah," the others said. "He dont know any such thing.He's just talking."

 "Do you think so?" the boy said. They continued to jeer at him,but he 
said nothing more. He leaned on the rail, looking down at the troutwhich 
he had already spent, and suddenly the acrimony, the conflict, was gone 
from their voices, as if to them tooit was as thoughhe had captured the 
fishand boughthis horse and wagon, they too partaking of thatadult traitof being convinced of anythingbyan assumption of silent superiority. I 
suppose that people, using themselves and each other so muchby words, 
are at least consistent in attributing wisdom to a still tongue, and fora 
while I could feel the other two seekingswiftlyfor some means by which to 
cope with him, to rob him ofhis horse and wagon.

 "You couldn't get twenty-five dollars for that pole," the first said."I bet 
anything you couldn't."

 "He hasn't caught that troutyet," the third said suddenly, then they both 
cried:

 "Yah, what'd I tell you? What's the man'sname? I dare you to tell. There 
aint any suchman." 


 "Ah, shut up," the second said. "Look. Here he comes again." They 
leaned on the rail, motionless, identical, their poles slanting slenderly inthe sunlight, also identical. The trout rose withouthaste, a shadow in faint 
wavering increase; again the little vortex faded slowly downstream. "Gee," 
the first one murmured.

 "We dont try to catch him anymore," he said. "We just watch Boston 
folks that come out and try."

 "Is he the only fish in this pool?"

 "Yes. He ran all the others out.The best place to fish around here is 
down at the Eddy."

 "No it aint," the second said."It's better at Bigelow's Mill two to one." 
Then they argued for a while about which was the best fishingand then left 
off all ofa sudden to watch the trout rise again and the broken swirl of 
water suck down a little of the sky. I asked how far it was to the nearest 
town. They told me.

 "But the closest car line is that way," the second said, pointing back 
down the road. "Where are you going?"

 "Nowhere. Just walking."

 "You from the college?"

 "Yes. Are there any factories in that town?"

 "Factories?" They looked at me.

 "No," the second said. "Not there." They looked at my clothes. "You 
looking for work?"

 "How about Bigelow's Mill?" the third said. "That'sa factory."

 "Factory my eye. He means a sure enough factory."

 "One witha whistle," I said. "I haven't heard any one oclock whistlesyet."

 "Oh," the second said."There's a clock in the unitarial steeple. You can 
find out the time from that.Haven't you got a watch on that chain?"

 "I broke it this morning." I showed them my watch. They examined itgravely.

 "It's still running," the second said. "What does a watch like that cost?"

 "It was a present," I said."My father gave it to me when I graduated 
from high school."

 "Are you a Canadian?" the third said. He had red hair. 


 "Canadian?"

 "He dont talk like them," the second said. "I've heard them talk.He talks 
like they do in minstrel shows."

 "Say," the third said. "Aintyouafraid he'll hit you?"

 "Hitme?"

 "You said he talks like a colored man."

 "Ah, dry up," the second said. "You can see the steeple when you get 
over that hill there."

 I thanked them. "I hope you have good luck. Only dont catch thatoldfellow down there. He deserves tobe let alone."

 "Cantanybody catch that fish,"the first said. They leaned on the rail,
looking down into the water, the three poles like three slanting threads of 
yellow fire in the sun. I walked upon my shadow, tramping itinto the 
dappled shade of trees again. The road curved, mounting away from the 
water. It crossed the hill, then descended winding, carrying the eye, the 
mind on aheadbeneath a still green tunnel, and the square cupola above 
the trees and the round eye of the clock but far enough. I sat down at the 
roadside. The grass was ankle deep, myriad. The shadows on the road were 
as still as if they had been put there with a stencil, with slanting pencils of 
sunlight. Butit was only atrain, and after a while it died away beyond the 
trees, the long sound,and then I could hear my watch and the train dyingaway, as though it were running through another month or another 
summer somewhere, rushingaway under the poised gull and all things 
rushing. Except Gerald. He wouldbe sort of grand too, pulling in lonely 
state across the noon, rowinghimself right out ofnoon, up the long bright 
air like an apotheosis, mounting into a drowsing infinity where only he and 
the gull, the one terrificallymotionless, the other in a steadyand measured 
pull and recover that partook of inertia itself, the world punily beneath 
their shadows on the sun. Caddy that blackguard that blackguard Caddy

 Their voices came over the hill, and the three slender poles like balanced 
threads of running fire. They looked at me passing, notslowing.

 "Well," I said."I dont see him."

 "We didn't try to catch him," the first said."You cant catch that fish."

 "There's the clock," the second said, pointing. "You can tell the time 
when you get a little closer." 


 "Yes," I said. "All right." I gotup. "You all going to town?"

 "We're going to the Eddy for chub," the first said.

 "You cant catch anything at the Eddy," the second said.

 "I guess you want to go to the mill, with a lot offellows splashingand 
scaringall the fishaway."

 "You cant catch any fish at the Eddy."

 "We wont catch none nowhere if we dont go on," the third said.

 "I dont see why you keep on talkingabout the Eddy," the second said. 
"You cant catch anything there."

 "You dont have to go," the first said. "You're not tied to me."

 "Let's go to the mill and go swimming," the third said.

 "I'm going to the Eddy and fish," the first said. "You can do as you 
please."

 "Say,how long has itbeen since you heard of anybody catching a fish at 
the Eddy?" the second said to the third.

 "Let's go to the mill and go swimming," the third said. The cupola sank 
slowly beyond the trees, with the round face of the clock far enough yet. We 
went on in the dappled shade. We came to an orchard, pink and white. It 
was full of bees; already we couldhear them.

 "Let's go to the mill and go swimming," the third said. A lane turned off 
beside the orchard. The third boy slowed and halted. The first went on, 
flecks of sunlight slipping along the pole across his shoulder and down the 
back ofhis shirt. "Come on," the third said. The second boy stopped too. 

Why must you marry somebody CaddyDo you want me to say it do you think that if I say it it wont be

 "Let's go up to the mill," he said. "Come on."

 The first boy went on. His bare feet made no sound, falling softer than 
leaves in the thin dust. In the orchard the bees sounded like a wind gettingup, a sound caughtby a spell justunder crescendo and sustained. The lane 
went along the wall,arched over, shattered with bloom, dissolving into 
trees. Sunlight slanted into it, sparse and eager. Yellow butterflies flickered 
along the shade like flecks of sun.

 "What do you want to go to the Eddy for?" the second boy said. "You can 
fishat the mill if you want to."

 "Ah, let him go," the third said. They looked after the first boy.Sunlight 


slid patchily across his walking shoulders, glintingalong the pole like 
yellow ants.

 "Kenny," the second said. Say it to Father will you I will am my fathers 
Progenitive I invented him created I him Say it to him it will not be for he 
will say I was not and then you and I since philoprogenitive

 "Ah, come on," the third boysaid. "They're already in." They looked 
after the first boy. "Yah," they saidsuddenly, "go on then, mamma'sboy. If 
he goes swimming he'll get his head wet and then he'll get a licking."They 
turned into the lane and went on, the yellow butterflies slantingabout 
them along the shade. 

it is because there is nothing else I believe there is something else but 
there may not be and then I You will find that even injustice is scarcely 
worthy of what you believe yourself to be He paid me noattention, hisjaw set in profile, his face turned a little away beneath hisbroken hat.

 "Why dont you go swimming with them?" I said. that blackguard Caddy 

Were you trying to pick a fight with him were you 

A liar and a scoundrel Caddy was dropped from his club for cheatingat cards got sent to Coventry caught cheating at midterm exams and 
expelled

Well what about it I'm not going to play cards with

 "Do you like fishing better than swimming?" I said. The sound of the 
bees diminished, sustained yet, asthoughinstead of sinkinginto silence, 
silence merely increased between us, as water rises. The road curved againand became a street between shady lawns with white houses. Caddy that 
blackguard can you think of Benjy and Father and do it not of me 

What else can I think about what else have I thought about The boy 
turned from the street. He climbed a picket fence without lookingback and 
crossed the lawn to a tree and laidthe pole down and climbed into the fork 
of the tree and sat there, his back to the road and the dappled sun 
motionless at lastupon his white shirt. else have I thought about I cant 
even cry I died last year I told you I had but I didn't know then what I 
meant I didn't know what I was saying Some days in late August at 
home are like this, the air thin and eager like this, with something init sad 
and nostalgic and familiar. Man the sum of his climatic experiences Father 
said. Man the sum of what have you. A probleminimpure properties 


carried tediously to an unvaryingnil: stalemate of dust and desire. but 
now I know I'm dead I tell you 

Then why must you listen we can go away you and Benjy and me 
where nobody knows us where The buggy was drawn by a white horse, 
his feet cropping in the thin dust; spidery wheels chattering thin anddry, 
movinguphill beneath a rippling shawl of leaves. Elm. No: ellum. Ellum. 

On what on your school money the money they sold the pasture for so 
you could go to Harvard dont you see you've got to finish now if you dont 
finish he'll have nothing

Sold the pasture His white shirt was motionless in the fork, in the 
flickering shade. The wheels were spidery. Beneath the sag of the buggy the 
hooves neatly rapid like the motions of a lady doing embroidery, 
diminishing without progress like a figure on a treadmill being drawn 
rapidly offstage. The street turned again. I could see the white cupola, the 
round stupid assertion of the clock. Sold the pasture 

Father will be dead in a year they say if he doesn't stop drinking and he 
wont stop he cant stop since I since last summer and then they'll sendBenjy to Jackson I cant cry I cant even cry one minute she was standingin the door the next minute he was pulling at her dress and bellowing his 
voice hammered back and forth between the walls in waves and she 
shrinking against the wall getting smaller and smaller with her white 
face her eyes like thumbs dug into it until he pushed her out of the room 
his voice hammering back and forth as though its own momentum would 
not let it stop as though there were no place for it in silence bellowing

 When you opened the door a bell tinkled, but just once, high and clear 
and small in the neat obscurity above the door, as though it were gauged 
and tempered to make that single clear small sound so asnot to wear the 
bell out nor to require the expenditure of too much silence in restoring itwhen the door opened upon the recent warm scent of baking;a little dirty 
child with eyes like a toybear's and two patent-leather pigtails.

 "Hello, sister."Her face was like a cup of milk dashed with coffee in the 
sweet warm emptiness. "Anybodyhere?"

 But she merely watched me until a door openedand the lady came.
Above the counter where the ranks of crisp shapes behind the glass her 
neat gray face her hair tight and sparse from her neat gray skull, spectacles 


in neat gray rims riding approaching like something on a wire, like acash 
box in astore. She looked like a librarian.Somethingamong dusty shelves 
of ordered certitudes long divorced from reality, desiccating peacefully, as 
if abreath of that air which sees injustice done

 "Two of these, please, ma'am."

 From under the counter she produced a square cut from anewspaperand laidit on the counter and lifted the two buns out. The little girlwatched them with still and unwinking eyes like two currantsfloating 
motionless in a cup of weak coffee Land of the kike home of the wop. 
Watching the bread, the neat grayhands,a broad gold band on the left 
forefinger, knuckled there by ablue knuckle.

 "Do you do your own baking,ma'am?"

 "Sir?" she said. Like that.Sir? Like on the stage. Sir? "Five cents.Was 
there anything else?"

 "No, ma'am. Not for me. This lady wants something."She wasnottallenough to see over the case, so she went to the end of the counter andlooked at the little girl.

 "Did youbring her in here?"

 "No, ma'am.She was here when I came."

 "You little wretch," she said. She came out around the counter, but she 
didn't touch the little girl. "Have you got anythingin your pockets?"

 "She hasn't got any pockets," I said. "She wasn't doinganything. She was 
just standinghere,waiting for you."

 "Why didn't the bell ring, then?" She glared at me. She just needed a 
bunch of switches, a blackboard behind her 2 x 2 e 5. "She'll hide it under 
her dress and a body'd never knowit. You, child.How'd you get in here?"

 The little girl said nothing.She looked at the woman, then she gave me 
a flyingblack glance and looked atthe woman again."Them foreigners," 
the woman said. "How'd she get in without the bell ringing?"

 "She came in when I opened the door," I said. "It rang once for both of 
us. She couldn't reach anything from here, anyway.Besides, I dont thinkshe would. Would you, sister?" The little girl looked at me, secretive, 
contemplative. "What do you want? bread?"

 She extended her fist. It uncurled upon anickel, moist and dirty, moist 
dirt ridged into her flesh. The coin was damp and warm. I could smellit, 


faintly metallic.

 "Have you got a five cent loaf, please, ma'am?"

 From beneath the counter she produced a square cut from a newspapersheet and laid it on the counter and wrapped a loaf into it. I laid the coinand another one on the counter. "And another one of those buns, please, 
ma'am."

 She took another bun from the case. "Give me that parcel," she said. I 
gave it to her and she unwrapped it and put the third bun in and wrapped 
it and tookup the coins and foundtwo coppers in her apron and gave them 
to me. I handed them to the little girl. Her fingers closed about them, damp 
and hot, like worms.

 "You going to give her that bun?" the woman said.

 "Yessum," I said. "I expect yourcooking smells as good to her as itdoes 
to me."

 I took up the two packages and gave the bread to the little girl, the 
woman all iron-gray behind the counter, watchingus with cold certitude. 
"You wait a minute," she said. She went to the rear. The door opened againand closed. The little girl watched me, holding the bread against herdirty 
dress.

 "What's yourname?" I said. She quit lookingat me, bu she was still 
motionless. She didn't even seem to breathe. The woman returned. She had 
a funny looking thingin her hand.She carried it sort of like itmight have 
been a dead pet rat.

 "Here," she said. The child looked at her. "Take it," the woman said, 
jabbingit at the little girl."It just looks peculiar. I calculate you wont know 
the difference when you eatit. Here. I cant stand here all day." The childtook it, still watching her. The woman rubbed her hands on her apron. "I 
got to have that bell fixed," she said. She went to the door and jerked itopen. The little bell tinkled once, faint and clear and invisible. We moved 
toward the door and the woman'speering back.

 "Thankyoufor the cake," I said.

 "Them foreigners,"she said, staring upinto the obscurity where the bell 
tinkled. "Take my advice and stayclear of them, young man."

 "Yessum," I said. "Come on, sister." We went out. "Thank you, ma'am."

 She swung the door to, then jerked it open again,making the bellgive 


forth its single small note. "Foreigners," she said, peeringup at the bell.

 We went on. "Well," I said. "How about some ice cream?"She was 
eating the gnarled cake. "Do you like ice cream?" She gave me ablack stilllook, chewing."Come on."

 We came to the drugstore and had some ice cream. She wouldn't put 
the loaf down. "Why not put it down so you can eatbetter?" I said, offeringto take it. But she held to it, chewing the ice cream like it was taffy. The 
bitten cake lay on the table. She ate the ice cream steadily, then she fell to 
on the cake again, looking about at the showcases. I finished mine and we 
went out.

 "Which way do you live?" I said.

 A buggy, the one with the white horse it was. Only Doc Peabody isfat. 
Three hundred pounds. You ride with him on the uphill side, holdingon. 
Children. Walking easier than holding uphill. Seen the doctor yet have 
you seen Caddy

 I dont have to I cant ask now afterward it will be all right it wont 
matter

 Because women so delicate somysterious Father said. Delicate 
equilibrium of periodical filthbetween two moonsbalanced. Moons he saidfull and yellow as harvest moons her hips thighs.Outside outside of them 
alwaysbut. Yellow. Feet soles with walking like. Then know that some man 
that all those mysteriousand imperious concealed. Withall that inside of 
them shapes an outward suavity waiting for a touch to. Liquid putrefaction 
like drowned thingsfloating like pale rubber flabbily filled getting the odor 
of honeysuckle all mixedup.

 "You'd better take yourbread on home, hadn't you?"

 She looked at me. She chewed quietly and steadily;at regular intervals a 
small distension passed smoothlydown her throat. I opened my package 
and gave her one of the buns."Goodbye," I said.

 I went on. Then I looked back.She wasbehind me. "Do you live down 
this way?" She saidnothing.She walked beside me, under my elbow sort 
of, eating. We went on. It was quiet, hardly anyone about getting the odor 
of honeysuckle all mixed She would have told me not to let me sit there on 
the steps hearing her door twilight slamming hearing Benjy still cryingSupper she would have to come down then getting honeysuckle all mixed 


up in it We reached the corner.

 "Well, I've got to go down this way," I said. "Goodbye."She stopped too. 
She swallowed the last of the cake, then she began on the bun, watching me 
across it. "Goodbye," I said. I turned into the street and went on,but I went 
to the next corner before I stopped.

 "Whichway do you live?" I said. "This way?" I pointed down the street. 
She just looked at me."Do you live over that way? I bet you live close to the 
station, where the trainsare. Dontyou?" She just looked at me, serene and 
secret and chewing. The street was empty both ways, with quiet lawns and 
housesneat among the trees, but no one at all except back there. We 
turned and wentback. Two men sat in chairs in front of a store.

 "Do you allknow this little girl? She sort of tookup with me and I cant 
find where she lives."

 They quit looking at me and looked at her.

 "Mustbe one of them new Italian families," one said.He wore a rusty 
frock coat. "I've seen her before. What's yourname, little girl?" looked at 
them blacklyfor a while, her jawsmovingsteadily.She swallowed without 
ceasing to chew.

 "Maybe she cant speak English," the other said.

 "They sent her after bread," I said. "She mustbe able to speak 
something."

 "What's your pa'sname?" the first said. "Pete? Joe? name John huh?" 
She took another bite from the bun.

 "What must I do with her?" I said. "She just follows me. I've got to get 
back to Boston."

 "You from the college?"

 "Yes, sir. And I've got to get on back."

 "You might go up the street and turn her over to Anse. He'll be upat the 
livery stable. The marshal."

 "I reckon that's what I'll have to do," I said."I've got to do somethingwith her. Much obliged. Come on,sister."

 We went up the street, on the shady side,where the shadow of the 
broken facade blotted slowly across the road. We came to the livery stable.
The marshal wasn't there. A man sitting in a chair tilted in the broad low 
door, where a dark cool breeze smelling of ammonia blew among the 


ranked stalls,said to look at the postoffice.He didn't know her either.

 "Them furriners. I cant tell one from another. You might take heracross 
the tracks where they live, and maybe somebody'll claim her."

 We went to the postoflice. It was back down the street. The man in the 
frock coat was opening anewspaper.

 "Anse just drove out of town,"he said. "I guess you'd better go down 
past the station and walk past them housesby the river. Somebody there'llknow her."

 "I guess I'll have to," Isaid. "Come on, sister." She pushed the lastpiece 
of the bun into her mouth and swallowed it. "Wantanother?" I said.She 
looked at me, chewing, her eyes black andunwinking and friendly. Itook 
the other two buns out and gave her one and bit into the other. I asked a 
man where the station wasand he showed me. "Come on, sister."

 We reached the station and crossed the tracks, where the river was. A 
bridge crossed it, and a street of jumbled frame houses followed the river, 
backed ontoit. A shabbystreet, but with an air heterogeneousand vividtoo. In the center of an untrimmed plot enclosed by a fence of gapingand 
broken picketsstood an ancient lopsided surrey and a weathered house 
from an upper window of whichhunga garment of vivid pink.

 "Does that look like your house?" I said. She looked at me over the bun. 
"This one?" I said, pointing.She just chewed, but it seemed to me that I 
discerned somethingaffirmative, acquiescent even ifit wasn't eager, in her 
air. "This one?" I said. "Come on, then." I entered the broken gate. I looked 
back ather. "Here?" I said. "This look like your house?"

 She nodded her head rapidly, looking at me, gnawing into the damp 
halfmoon of the bread. We went on. A walk of broken random flags, 
speared by fresh coarse blades of grass, led to the broken stoop. There was 
no movementabout the house at all, and the pink garmenthanging in no 
wind from the upper window. There was a bell pull witha porcelain knob, 
attached to about six feet of wire when I stopped pulling and knocked. The 
little girl had the crust edgeways in her chewing mouth.

 A woman opened the door. Shelooked at me, then she spoke rapidly to 
the little girl in Italian, witha rising inflexion, then a pause, interrogatory. 
She spoke to her again the little girl lookingat her across the end of the 
crust, pushingit into her mouth with a dirty hand 


 "She says she lives here." I said. "I met her down town. Is this your 
bread?

 "No spika," the woman said. She spoke to the little girl again. The little 
girl just looked at her.

 "No live here?" I said. I pointed to the girl, then at her, then at the door. 
The woman shook her head. She spoke rapidly. She came to the edge of the 
porch and pointed down the road,speaking.

 I nodded violently too. "You come show?" I said. I took her arm,wavingmy other hand toward the road. She spoke swiftly, pointing."You come 
show," I said, trying to lead her down the steps.

 "Si, si,"she said, holdingback, showing me whatever it was. I nodded 
again.

 "Thanks. Thanks. Thanks." I went down the steps and walked toward 
the gate, not running,but pretty fast. I reached the gate and stopped and 
looked at her for a while. The crust was gone now,and she looked atme 
with her black, friendly stare. The woman stood on the stoop, watching us.

 "Come on, then," I said. "We'llhave to find the right one sooner or 
later."

 She moved along justunder myelbow. We went on. The houses allseemed empty. Not a soul in sight. A sort of breathlessness that empty 
houses have. Yet they couldn't allbe empty. All the different rooms,if you 
could justslice the walls awayall of a sudden. Madam, your daughter, if 
you please. No. Madam, for God'ssake, your daughter. She moved along 
justunder my elbow, her shiny tight pigtails, and then the last house 
played out and the road curved out of sightbeyond a wall, following the 
river. The woman was emergingfrom the broken gate, with a shawl over 
ner head and clutched under her chary. The road curved on, empty. I found 
a coin and gave it to the little girl. A quarter. "Goodbye, sister," I said. Then 
I ran.

 I ran fast,not lookingback.Just before the road curved away I looked 
back.She stood in the road, a small figure clasping the loaf ofbread to her 
filthv little dress, her eyes still andblack and unwinking I ran on

A lane turned from the road. I entered it and after a while I slowed to a 
fast walk. The lane went between back premises-- unpainted houseswith 
more of those gay and startling colored garments on lines, abarn broken



backed, decaying quietlyamong rank orchard trees, unpruned and weed-
choked, pink and white and murmurous with sunlight and with bees. I 
looked back. The entrance to the lane was empty. I slowed still more, my 
shadow pacing me, dragging its head through the weeds that hid the fence.

 The lane went back toa barred gate, became defunctive in grass,a mere 
path scarred quietly intonew grass. I climbed the gate into a woodlot and 
crossed it and came to another wall and followed that one, my shadow 
behind me now. There were vines and creepers where at home would be 
honeysuckle. Coming and comingespecially in the dusk when it rained, 
getting honeysuckle all mixed up in it as though it were not enoughwithout 
that, notunbearable enough. What did you let him for kiss kiss 

I didn't let him I made him watching me getting mad What do you 
think of that? Red print of my hand coming up through her face like 
turning a light on under your hand her eyes going bright 

It's not for kissing I slapped you. Girl's elbows at fifteen Father said 
you swallow like you had a fishbone in your throat what's the matter with 
you and Caddy across the table not to look at me. It's for letting it be some 
darn town squirt I slapped you you will will you now I guess you say calfrope. My red hand coming up out of her face. What do you think of that 
scouring her head into the. Grass sticks cries-crossed into the flesh 
tingling scouring her head. Say calf rope say it

I didn't kiss a dirty girl like Natalie anyway The wall went into 
shadow, and then my shadow, I had tricked it again. I had forgot about the 
river curving along the road. I climbed the wall. And then she watched me 
jump down, holding the loaf against her dress.

 I stood in the weeds and we looked at one another for a while.

 "Why didn't you tell me you lived out this way, sister?" The loaf was 
wearing slowly out of the paper; already it needed a new one. "Well, come 
on then and show me the house."not a dirty girl like Natalie. It was 
raining we could hear it on the roof, sighing through the high sweet 
emptiness of the barn.

There? touching her 

Not there

There? not raining hard but we couldn't hear anything but the roof and 
if it was my blood or her blood 


She pushed me down the ladder and ran off and left me Caddy didWas it there it hurt you when Caddy did ran off was it there 
Oh She walked just under myelbow, the top of her patent leather head, 

the loaf fraying out of the newspaper. 
"If you dont get home pretty soon you're going to wear that loaf out. And 

then what'll your mamma say?" I bet I can lift you up 
You cant I'm too heavy 
Did Caddy go away did she go to the house you cant see the barn from 

our house did you ever try to see the barn fromIt was her fault she pushed me she ran away 
I can lift you up see how I canOh her blood or my blood Oh We went on in the thin dust, our feet 

silent as rubber in the thin dust where pencils of sun slanted in the trees. 
And I could feel water again running swiftand peaceful in the secret 
shade.

 "You live a long way, dont you.You're mighty smart to go thisfarto 
town by yourself." It's like dancing sitting down did you ever dance sittingdown? We could hear the rain, a rat in the crib, the empty barn vacant 
with horses. How do you hold to dance do you hold like this

OhI used to hold like this you thought I wasn't strong enough didn't you 
Oh Oh Oh OhI hold to use like this I mean did you hear what I said I saidoh oh oh oh

 The road went on, still and empty, the sun slanting more and more. Her 
stiff little Pigtails were bound at the tips with bits of crimson cloth. A 
corner of the wrapping flapped a little as she walked, the nose of the loaf 
naked. I stopped.

 "Look here. Do you live down this road? We haven't passed a house in a 

mile, almost." 
She looked at me, blackand secret and friendly. 
"Where do you live, sister? Dont you live back there in town?" 
There was a bird somewhere in the woods, beyond the broken and 

infrequent slanting of sunlight. 
"Your Papa's going to be worried aboutyou. Dont you reckon you'll get a 


whipping for not coming straighthome with thatbread?" 
The bird whistled again,invisible,a sound meaningless and profound, 
inflexionless, ceasing as though cut off with the blow of a knife, andagain,
and that sense of water swiftand peaceful above secret places, felt, not 
seen not heard.

 "Oh, hell, sister."About half the paper hung limp. "That's not doing any 
good now." I tore it offand dropped it beside the road. "Come on. We'llhave to go back to town. We'll go back along the river."

 We left the road. Among the moss little pale flowers grew, and the sense 
of water mute and unseen. I hold to use like this I mean I use to hold She 
stood in the door looking at us her hands on her hips 

You pushed me it was your fault it hurt me too 

We were dancing sitting down I bet Caddy cant dance sitting down 

Stop that stop that

I was just brushing the trash off the back of your dress

You keep your nasty old hands off of me it was your fault you pushed 
me down I'm mad at you

I dont care she looked at us stay mad she went away We began to hear 
the shouts, the splashings; I saw abrown body gleam for an instant. 

Stay mad. My shirt was getting wet and my hair. Across the roof 
hearing the roof loud now I could see Natalie going through the garden 
among the rain. Get wet I hope you catch pneumonia go on home 
Cowface. I jumped hard as I could into the hogwallow the mud yellowed 
up to my waist stinking I kept on plunging until I fell down and rolled 
over in it "Hear them in swimming, sister? I wouldn't mind doing that 
myself." If I had time. When I have time. I could hear my watch. mud was 
warmer than the rain it smelled awful. She had her back turned I went 
around in front of her. You know what I was doing? She turned her back I 
went around in front of her the rain creeping into the mud flatting her 
bod ice through her dress it smelled horrible. I was hugging her that'swhat I was doing. She turned her back I went around in front of her. I 
was hugging her I tell you. 

I dont give a damn what you were doing

You dont you dont I'll make you I'll make you give a damn. She hit my 
hands away I smeared mud on her with the other hand I couldn't feel the 


wet smacking of her hand I wiped mud from my legs smeared it on her 
wet hard turning body hearing her fingers going into my face but I 
couldn't feel it even when the rain began to taste sweet on my lips

 They saw us from the water first, heads and shoulders. They yelled and 
one rose squatting and sprang among them. They looked like beavers, the 
water ripping about their chins, yelling.

 "Take that girl awayl What did you want to bring a girl here for? Go on 
awayl"

 "She wont hurt you. We just want to watch you for a while."

 They squatted in the water. Their heads drew into a clump, atching us, 
then they broke and rushed toward us, hurling water with their hands. We 
moved quick.

 "Look out,boys; she wont hurt you."

 "Go on away,Harvard!" It was the second boy, the one that thought the 
horse and wagon back there at the bridge. "Splash them,fellows!"

 "Let's get out and throw them in,"another said. "Iaint afraid of any 
girl."

" Splash them! Splash them!" They rushed toward us, hurling water. We 
moved back. "Go on away!" they yelled. "Go on away!"

 We went away. They huddled just under the bank, their slick heads in a 
row against the bright water. We went on. "That's not forus, is it." The sun 
slanted through to the moss here and there, leveller. "Poor kid, you're just 
a girl." Little flowers grew among the moss, littler than I had ever seen. 
"You're just a girl. Poor kid." There was a path, curving alongbeside the 
water. Then the water was still again, darkand stilland swift. "Nothing but 
a girl. Poor sister." We lay in the wet grass panting the rain like coldshot on my back. Do you care now do you do you

My Lord we sure are in a mess get up. Where the rain touched my 
forehead it began to smart my hand came red away streaking off pink inthe rain. Does it hurt

 Of course it does what do you reckon

 I tried to scratch your eyes out my Lord we sure do stink we better try 
to wash it off in the branch "There's town again, sister. You'll have to go 
home now. I've got to get back to school. Look how late it's getting. You'llgo home now, wont you?" But she just looked at me with her black, secret, 


friendly gaze, the half-naked loaf clutched to her breast. "It's wet. I thought 
we jumped backin time." I took my handkerchiefand tried to wipe the 
loaf, but the crustbegan to come off, so I stopped. "We'll justhave tolet itdry itself. Hold it like this." She held it like that. It looked kind of like rats 
had been eatingit now. and the water building and building up the 
squatting back the sloughed mud stinking surfaceward pocking the 
pattering surface like grease on a hot stove. I told you I'd make you

 I dont give a goddam what you do

 Then we heard the running and we stopped and looked back and saw 
him comingup the path running, the level shadows flicking upon hislegs.

 "He's in a hurry. We'd--" then I saw another man,an oldish man 
running heavily, clutching a stick,and aboy naked from the waist up, 
clutchinghis pantsas he ran.

" There's Julio," the little girl said, and then I saw his Italian face and hiseyes as he sprangupon me. We went down. His hands were jabbing at my 
face and he was saying somethingand trying to bite me, I reckon, and then 
they hauled him offand held him heavingand thrashing and yellingand 
they held his arms and he tried to kick me until they dragged him back. 
The little girl was howling, holding the loaf in botharms. The halfnaked 
boy was dartingand jumpingup and down, clutching his trousers and 
someone pulled me upin time to see another stark naked figure come 
around the tranquil bendin the path running and change direction in 
midstride and leap into the woods, a couple of garmentsrigid asboards 
behind it. Juliostill struggled. The man who had pulled me up said, 
"Whoa,now. We got you." He wore a vest butno coat. Upon it was amet 
shield In his other hand he clutched a knotted, polished stick.

" You're Anse, aren't you?" I said. "I was looking for you. What's the 
matter?"

 "I warn you that anything you say will be used aganst you,"he said. 
"You're under arrest."

" I killa heem," Julio said.He struggled. Two men held him. The little 
girl howled steadily, holding the bread. "You steala my seester,"Juliosaid. 
"Let go, meesters."

" Steal his sister?" I said."Why,I've been--"

 "Shet up," Anse said. "You can tell that to Squire." 


 " Steal his sister?" I said.Julio broke from the men and sprang atme 
again,but the marshal met him and they struggled until the other two 
pinioned hisarms again. Anse released him, panting.

 "You durn furriner," he said. "I've a good mind to take youup too,for 
assault and battery." He turned to me again. "Will you come peaceable, or 
do I handcuff you?""I'll come peaceable," I said. "Anything, just so Ican 
find someone--do something with-- Stole his sister," I said. "Stole his--"

" I've warned you," Anse said. "He aims to charge you with meditated 
criminal assault.Here, you, make that gal shut up that noise."

 "Oh," I said. Then Ibegan to laugh. Two more boys with plastered heads 
and round eyes came out of the bushes, buttoningshirts that had already 
dampened onto their shoulders and arms, and I tried to stop the laughter, 
but I couldn't.

 "Watch him,Anse, he's crazy, Ibelieve."

 "I'll h-have to qu-quit," I said. "It'll stop in a mu-minute. The other timeit saidah ahah," I said, laughing."Let me sit down a while." I sat down, 
they watchingme, and the little girl with her streaked face and the gnawed 
looking loaf,and the water swifand peaceful below the path. After awhilethe laughter ran out. But my throat wouldn't quit trying to laugh, like 
retching after your stomach is empty.

 "Whoa, now," Anse said. "Get agrip on yourself."

 "Yes," I said, tightening my throat. There was another yellow butterfly, 
like one of the sunflecks had come loose. After a while I didn't have to holdmy throat so tight. I got up."I'm ready. Which way?"

 We followed the path, the two others watchingJulio and the little girland the boys somewhere in the rear. The path went along the river to the 
bridge. We crossed it and the tracks, people coming to the doors to look at 
us and more boysmaterialising from somewhere until when we turned into 
the main street we had quite a procession. Before the drug store stood an 
auto, abig one,but I didn't recognise them until MrsBland said,

" Why, Quentin! Quentin Compson!" Then I sawGerald, and Spoade in 
the back seat, sitting on the back of hisneck. AndShreve. I didn't know the 
two girls.

 "Quentin Compson!"Mrs Bland said.

" Good afternoon," I said, raising my hat. "I'm under arrest. I'm sorry I 


didn't get your note. DidShreve tell you?"

 "Under arrest?" Shreve said. "Excuse me," he said.He heaved himself 
up and climbed over their feet and got out. He had on a pair of myflannel 
pants, like a glove. I didn't remember forgetting them. I didn't remember 
how many chins Mrs Bland had, either. The prettiest girl was with Geraldin front, too. They watched me through veils, with a kind of delicate horror. 
"Who's under arrest?" Shreve said. "What's this, mister?"

 "Gerald," Mrs Bland said. "Send these people away. You get in thiscar, 
Quentin."

 Gerald got out. Spoade hadn't moved.

 "What's he done, Cap?" he said. "Robbed a hen house?"

 "I warn you," Anse said. "Do you know the prisoner?"

 "Know him," Shreve said. "Look here--"

 "Then you can come along to the squire's. You'reobstructing justice. 
Come along."He shook myarm.

 "Well, good afternoon," I said. "I'm glad to have seen youall. Sorry I 
couldn't be with you."

 "You,Gerald," Mrs Bland said.

 "Look here, constable," Gerald said.

 "I warn you you're interfering with an officer of the law," Anse said. "If 
you've anything to say,you can come to the squire's and make cognizance 
of the prisoner." We went on. Quite a procession now, Anse and I leading. I 
could hear them telling them whatit was, and Spoade asking questions, 
and then Julio said something violently in Italian and I looked back and 
saw the little girl standingat the curb, lookingat me with her friendly, 
inscrutable regard.

 "Git on home," Julio shouted ather. "I beat hell outa you."

 We went down the street and turned into a bit of lawn in which,set 
back from the street, stood a one storey building of brick trimmed with 
white. We went up the rock path to the door, where Anse halted everyone 
except us and made them remain outside. We entered, a bare room 
smelling of stale tobacco. There was a sheet iron stove in the center of a 
wooden frame filled with sand, and a faded map on the wall and the dingy 
plat of a township.Behind a scarred littered table a man with a fierce roach 
of iron grayhair peered at us over steel spectacles. 


 "Got him, did ye, Anse?" he said.

 "Got him, Squire."

 He opened a huge dustybookand drew it to him and dipped a foul pen 
into an inkwell filled with what looked like coal dust.

 "Look here, mister," Shreve said.

 "The prisoner's name," the squire said. I told him. He wrote it slowlyinto the book, the pen scratchingwith excruciating deliberation.

 "Look here, mister," Shreve said. "We know this fellow. We--"

 "Order in the court," Anse said.

 "Shut up,bud," Spoade said. "Let him do it his way.He's going to 
anyhow."

 "Age," the squire said. I told him. He wrote that, hismouthmoving as he 
wrote. "Occupation." I told him. "Harvard student,hey?" he said. He 
looked up at me, bowing hisneck a little to see over the spectacles. His eyes 
were clear and cold, like a goat's. "What are youup to, coming out here 
kidnapping children?"

 "They're crazy, Squire,"Shreve said. "Whoever says thisboy'skidnapping--"

 Julio moved violently. "Crazy?" he said. "Dont I catcha heem, eh? Dont 
I see weetha my own eyes–-"

 "You're a liar,"Shreve said. "You never--"

 "Order, order," Anse said, raising his voice.

 "You fellers shet up," the squire said. "If they dont stay quiet, turn 'em 
out, Anse." They got quiet. The squire looked at Shreve, then atSpoade, 
then atGerald. "You know this young man?" he said toSpoade.

 "Yes, your honor," Spoade said."He's just a countryboyin schoolup 
there. He dont mean any harm. I think the marshal'll find it'sa mistake. 
Hisfather's a congregational minister."

 "H'm," the squire said. "What was you doing, exactly?" I told him,he 
watchingme with his cold, pale eyes. "How about it, Anse?"

 "Might have been," Anse said."Them durn furriners."

 "I American," Julio said. "I gotta da pape'."

 "Where's the gal?"

 "He sent her home," Anse said.

 "Was she scared or anything?" 


 "Not till Julio there jumped on the prisoner. They were just walking 
along the river path, towards town. Some boys swimming told us which 
way they went."

 "It's a mistake, Squire,"Spoade said. "Children and dogs are always 
takingup with him like that. He cant help it."

 "H'm," the squire said. He looked out of the window for a while. We 
watched him. I could hear Julio scratching himself. The squire looked 
back.

 "Air yousatisfied the gal aint took any hurt, you, there?"

 "No hurt now," Julio said sullenly.

 "You quit work to hunt for her?"

 "Sure I quit. I run. I run like hell. Looka here, looka there, then man 
tella me he seen him give her she eat. She go weetha."

 "H'm," the squire said. "Well, son, I calculate you owe Julio somethingfor taking him away from his work."

 "Yes, sir," I said. "How much?"

 "Dollar, I calculate."

 I gave Julioa dollar.

 "Well," Spoade said. "If that's all--I reckon he's discharged, your 
honor?"

 The squire didn't look at him."How far'd you run him, Anse?"

 "Two miles, at least. It wasabout two hoursbefore we caught him."

 "H'm," the squire said. He mused a while. We watched him, his stiff 
crest, the spectacles riding low on his nose. The yellow shape of the 
window grew slowly across the floor, reached the wall, climbing. Dust 
motes whirled and slanted. "Six dollars."

 "Six dollars?"Shreve said. "What's that for?"

 "Six dollars," the squire said.He looked at Shreve a moment, then at me 
again.

 "Look here," Shreve said.

 "Shut up," Spoade said. "Give itto him,bud, and let's get out of here. 
The ladies are waiting for us. Yougot six dollars?"

 "Yes," I said. I gave him six dollars.

 "Case dismissed," he said.

 "You get a receipt," Shreve said. "You get a signed receipt for that 


money."

 The squire looked at Shreve mildly. "Case dismissed,"he said without 
raising his voice.

 "I'll be damned--"Shreve said.

 "Come on here,"Spoade said, takinghisarm. "Good afternoon,Judge. 
Much obliged." As we passed out the door Julio's voice rose again, violent, 
then ceased. Spoade was lookingat me, his brown eyes quizzical, a little 
cold. "Well, bud, I reckon you'll do your girl chasingin Boston after this."

 "You damned fool,"Shreve said. "What the hell do youmean anyway, 
straggling off here, fooling with these damn wops?"

 "Come on," Spoade said. "Theymustbe gettingimpatient."

 Mrs Bland was talking to them. They were Miss Holmes and Miss 
Daingerfield and they quit listening to her and looked at me again with that 
delicate and curious horror, their veils turned back upon their little white 
noses and their eyes fleeingand mysteriousbeneath the veils.

 "Quentin Compson," Mrs Bland said. "What would your mother say. A 
young man naturally gets into scrapes, but tobe arrested on foot bya 
country policeman. What did they think he'd done, Gerald?"

 "Nothing,"Gerald said.

 "Nonsense. What wasit, you, Spoade?"

 "He was trying to kidnap that little dirty girl, but they caught him in 
time,"Spoade said.

 "Nonsense," Mrs Bland said, but her voice sort of died away and she 
stared at me for a moment,and the girls drew their breaths in withasoft 
concerted sound. "Fiddlesticks,"Mrs Bland said briskly."If that isn't just 
like these ignorant lowclass Yankees. Get in,Quentin."

 Shreve and I sat on two small collapsible seats. Gerald cranked the car 
and got in and we started.

 "Now, Quentin,you tell me what all this foolishness is about," Mrs 
Bland said. I told them, Shreve hunched and furious on his little seat and 
Spoade sittingagain on the back of his neckbeside Miss Daingerfield.

 "And the joke is, all the time Quentin had us all fooled,"Spoade said. 
"All the time we thought he was the model youth that anybody couldtrust a 
daughter with,until the police showed him up at his nefarious work."

 "Hush up,Spoade,"Mrs Bland said. We drove down the street and 


crossed the bridge and passed the house where the pink garment hung inthe window. "That's what you get for not reading mynote. Why didn't you 
come and get it? Mr MacKenzie says he told you it was there."

 "Yessum. Iintended to, but Inever went back to the room."

 "You'd have let us sit there waiting I dont know how long,if ithadn't 
been for Mr MacKenzie. When he said you hadn't come back, that left an 
extra place, so we asked him to come. We're very glad to have you anyway, 
Mr MacKenzie." Shreve saidnothing. His arms were folded and he glared 
straight ahead past Gerald's cap. It was a cap for motoring in England. Mrs 
Bland said so. We passed thathouse, and three others, and another yardwhere the little girl stood by the gate. She didn't have the bread now,and 
her face looked like it had been streaked with coaldust. I waved my hand, 
but she made no reply, only her head turned slowly as the car passed, 
followingus with her unwinking gaze. Then we ran beside the wall, our 
shadowsrunningalong the wall,and after a while we passed a piece of torn 
newspaper lyingbeside the road and I began to laugh again. I could feel itin my throat and I looked off into the trees where the afternoon slanted, 
thinking of afternoon and of the birdand the boys in swimming.Butstill I 
couldn't stop it and then I knew that if I tried too hard to stop it I'd be 
crying and I thoughtabout how I'd thought about I could notbe a virgin, 
with so many of them walkingalong in the shadows and whisperingwith 
their soft girlvoices lingeringin the shadowy places and the words comingout and perfume and eyes you could feel not see, but if it was that simple to 
do it wouldn't be anythingandif it wasn't anything, what was I and then 
Mrs Bland said, "Quentin? Is he sick, Mr MacKenzie?" and then Shreve's 
fat hand touched my knee andSpoade began talking and I quit trying to 
stop it.

 "If that hamper is in his way, Mr MacKenzie, move it over on yourside. I 
broughta hamper of wine because I thinkyoung gentlemen should drink 
wine, although my father,Gerald's grandfather " ever do that Have you 
ever done that In the gray darkness a little light her hands locked about

 "They do, when they can get it," Spoade said."Hey,Shreve?" her knees 
her face looking at the sky the smell of honeysuckle upon her face and 
throat

 "Beer, too," Shreve said.Hishand touched my knee again. I moved my 


knee again. like a thin wash of lilac colored paint talking about himbringing

 "You're not a gentleman," Spoade said. him between us until the shape 
of her blurred not with dark

 "No. I'm Canadian,"Shreve said. talking about him the oar blades 
winking him along winking the Cap made for motoring in England and 
all time rushing beneath and they two blurred within the other forever 
more he had been in the army had killed men

 "I adore Canada," Miss Daingerfield said. "I think it's marvellous."

 "Did you ever drink perfume?"Spoade said. with one hand he could lift 
her to his shoulder and run with her running Running

 "No," Shreve said. running the beast with two backs and she blurred inthe winking oars running the swine of Euboeleus running coupled withinhow many Caddy

 "Neither did I," Spoade said. I dont know too many there was 
something terrible in me terrible in me Father I have committed Have you 
ever done that We didnt we didnt do that did we do that

 "andGerald's grandfather always picked his own mint before breakfast, 
while the dew was still on it.He wouldn't even let old Wilkie touchit do 
you remember Geraldbutalways gathered it himself and made his own 
julep. He was as crotchety about his julep asan old maid, measuringeverything bya recipe in his head.There was only one man he ever gave 
that recipe to; that was " we did how can you not know it if youll just 
wait Ill tell you how it was it was a crime we did a terrible crime it cannot 
be hid you think it can but wait Poor Quentin youve never done that 
have you and Ill tell you how it was Ill tell Father then itll have to be 
because you love Father then well have to go away amid the pointing and 
the horror the clean flame Ill make you say we did Im stronger than you 
Ill make you know we did you thought it was them but it was me listen 
I fooled you all the time it was me you thought I was in the house where 
that damn honeysuckle trying not to think the swing the cedars the secret 
surges the breathing locked drinking the wild breath the yes Yes Yes yes

 "never be got to drink wine himself, but he always said that a hamper 
what book did you read thatin the one where Gerald's rowing suit ofwinewas a necessary part of any gentlemen's picnic basket" did you love them 


Caddy did you love them When they touched me I died

 one minute she was standing there the next he was yelling and pulling at 
her dress they went into the hall and up the stairs yelling and shoving at 
her up the stairs to the bathroom door and stopped her back against the 
door and her arm across her face yelling and trying to shove her intothe 
bathroom when she came in to supper T. P. was feeding him he started 
again just whimpering at first until she touched him then he yelled she 
stood there her eyes like cornered rats then I was running in the gray 
darkness it smelled of rain and allflower scents the damp warm airreleased and crickets sawingawayin the grass pacing me with a smalltravelling island of silence Fancywatched me across the fence blotchy like 
a quilt on a line I thought damn that nigger he forgot to feed her again I 
ran down the hillin that vacuum of crickets like a breath travellingacross a 
mirror she was lying in the water her head on the sand spit the water 
flowingabout her hips there was alittle more light in the water her skirt 
half saturated flopped alongher flanks to the waters motion in heavy 
ripples goingnowhere renewed themselves of their own movement I stoodon the bank I could smell the honeysuckle on the water gap the air seemed 
to drizzle with honeysuckle and with the rasping of crickets a substance 
you could feel 
on the flesh 
is Benjy still cryingI dont know yes I dontknowpoor BenjyI sat down on the bank the crass was damn a little then Ifound my shoes 
wetget out of that water are you crazybut she didnt move her face was awhite blur framed out of the blur of the 
sandby her hair 
get out nowshe sat up then she rose her skirt flopped againsther draining she climbed 
the bank her clothes flopping sat down 
why dont you wring it out do youwant to catch cold 
yesthe water sucked and gurgled across the sand spit and on in the dark 


among the willows across the shallow the water rippled like a piece of cloth 
holding still a little lightas water does 
hes crossed all the oceans all around the worldthen she talked abouthim clasping her wet knees her face tilted back in the 
gray light the smell of honeysuckle there was a light in mothers room and 
in Benjys where T. P. was puttinghim tobed 
do you love himher hand came out I didnt move itfumbled down my arm and she held my 
hand flat against her chest her heart thuddingno nodid he make you then he made you do it let him he was stronger than you 
and he tomorrow Ill kill him I swear I will father neednt know untilafterward and then you and I nobody need ever knowwe can take myschool money we can cancel my matriculation Caddy youhate him dont 
you dont youshe held my hand against her chest her heart thudding I turned andcaught 
her armCaddy you hate him dont youshe moved my handup against her throat herheart was hammering there 
poor Quentinher face looked at the sky it was low so low that all smells and sounds of 
night seemed to have been crowded down like under a slack tent especiallythe honeysuckle it had got into my breathing it was on her face and throat 
like paint her blood pounded against my hand I was leaning on my other 
arm it began tojerk andjump andI had to pant to get any air at all out of 
that thick grayhoneysuckleyes I hate him I would die for him Ive already died for him I die for himover and over again everytime this goes 
when I lifted my hand I could stillfeel crisscrossed twigs and grassburning 
into the palmpoor Quentinshe leaned back on her arms her hands locked about her knees 
youve never done that have youwhat done whatthat what I have what I did 


yes yes lots of times with lots of girlsthen I was crying her hand touched me again and I was cryingagainst her 
damp blouse then she lying on her back looking past my head into the sky I 
could see a rim of white under her irises I opened my knife do you 
remember the day damuddy died when you sat down in the water in your 
drawers 
yesI held the point of the knife ather throat 
it wont take but a second justa second then I can do mine I can do minethen 
all right can you do yours by yourselfyes the blades long enough Benjysin bed bynow 
yesit wont take but a second Ill try not to hurt 
all right 
will you close your eyes 
no like this youll have to push it harder 
touch your hand to itbut she didnt move her eyes were wide open looking past myhead at the 
skyCaddy do you remember how Dilsey fussed at youbecause your drawers 
were muddydont cryIm not crying Caddy 
push itare you going to do you wantme toyes push ittouchyour hand to itdont cry poor Quentinbut I couldnt stop she held my head against her damp hard breast I couldhear her heart going firm and slow now not hammering and the water
gurgling among the willows in the dark and waves of honeysuckle comingupthe air myarm and shoulder were twisted under me 
what is it what are you doingher muscles gathered I sat up 


its my knife I dropped itshe sat upwhat time isitI dont knowshe rose to her feet I fumbled along the ground 
Im going letit go 
to the houseI could feel her standing there I could smell her damp clothes feelingher 
thereits right here somewhere 
let it go you can find it tomorrow come on 
wait a minute Ill find itare you afraid to 
here it is it was right here all the time 
was it come onI got up and followed we went up the hill the crickets hushingbefore us 
its funny how you can sit down and drop something and have to hunt allaround foritthe gray it was gray with dew slantingup into the gray sky 
then the trees beyonddamn that honeysuckle I wish it would stop 
youused to like itwe crossed the crest and went on toward the trees she walked into me she 
gave over a little the ditch was a black scar on the gray grass she walked 
into me again she looked at me and gave over we reached the ditch 
lets go this way 
what forlets see if you can still see Nancysbones I havens thought 
to look in a long time have you 
it was matted with vinesandbriers dark 
they were right here you cant tell whether you see them or not can you 
stop Quentin 
come onthe ditch narrowed closed she turned toward the trees 
stop Quentin 


CaddyI got in front of her againCaddystop itI held herIm stronger than youshe was motionless hard unyielding but stillI wont fightstop youdbetter stopCaddy dont Caddyit wont do any good dont you know it wont let me go the honeysuckledrizzled and drizzled I could hear the crickets watchingus in a circle she 
moved back went around me on toward the treesyou go on back to the house youneednt comeI went onwhy dont you go on back to the housedamn that honeysucklewe reached the fence she crawled through I crawled through when I rose 
from stooping he was coming outof the trees into the gray toward us 
coming toward us tall and flat andstill even moving like he was still she 
went to himthis isQuentin Im wet Im wet all over you dont have to ifyou dont want to 
their shadows one shadow her head rose it was above his on the skyhigher 
their two heads you dont have to if you dont want to then not two heads 
the darkness smelled of rain of damp grass and leaves the gray light 
drizzling like rain the honeysuckle comingup in damp waves I couldsee 
her face a blur against his shoulder he held her in one arm like she was no 
bigger than a child he extended his hand 
glad to know youwe shook hands then we stood there her shadow high 
against his shadow one shadowwhatre you going to do Quentin 
walk a while I think Ill go throughthe woods to the road and come back 
through townI turned away goinggoodnight 


QuentinI stoppedwhat do you wantin the woods the tree frogs were going smelling rainin the air they sounded 
like toy musicboxes that were hard to turn and the honeysucklecome herewhat do you wantcome here QuentinI went back she touched my shoulder leaning down her shadow the blur of 
her face leaning down from his high shadow I drew back 
look outyou go on homeIm not sleepy Im going to take a walk 
wait forme at the branchIm goingfor a walkIll be there soon wait for me you waitno Im going through the woods 
I didnt look back the tree frogs didnt pay me any mind the gray light like 
moss in the trees drizzling but still it wouldnt rain after a while I turnedwent back to the edge of the woods as soon as I got there I began to smellhoneysuckle again I could see the lights on the courthouse clock andthe 
glare of town the square on the sky and the dark willows along the branch 
and the lightin mothers windows the light still on in Benjys room and Istooped through the fence and went across the pasture running I ranin the 
gray grass among the crickets the honeysuckle getting stronger and 
stronger and the smell of water then I could see the water the color of gray 
honeysuckle I lay down on the bank with my face close to the ground so I 
couldnt smell the honeysuckle I couldnt smell it then and I lay there feelingthe earth going through my clothes listening to the water and after awhileI wasntbreathing so hard and I lay there thinking that if I didnt move my 
face I wouldnt have tobreathe hard and smell it and then I wasnt thinkingabout anythingat all she came along the bankand stopped I didnt move 
its late you go on homewhatyou go on home its late 


all righther clothes rustled I didnt move they stopped rustlingare you going in like I told you 
I didnt hear anythingCaddyyes I will if you want me to I willI sat up she was sitting on the ground her hands clasped about her knee 
go on to the house like I told you 
yes Ill do anything you want me toanything yes 
she didnt even look at me I caughther shoulder and shook her hard 
you shut upI shook heryou shut upyou shutupyesshe lifted her face then I saw she wasnt even looking at me atall I could see 
that white rim 
get upI pulled her she was limp I lifted her to her feet 
go on nowwas Benjy still crying when you left 
go onwe crossed the branch the roof came in sight then the windowsupstairs 
hes asleep nowI had to stop and fasten the gate she went on in the gray light the smell of 
rain and stillit wouldnt rain and honey- suckle beginning to come from the 
garden fence beginning she went into the shadow I could hear her feet 
thenCaddyI stopped at the steps I couldnt hear her feet 
CaddyI heard her feet then my hand touched her not warm not cool just still her 
clothes a little damp stilldo you love him now 
not breathing except slow like faraway breathingCaddy do you love him now 


I dont know 
outside the gray light the shadowsof things like dead 
things in stagnant water 
I wish you were deaddo you you coming in now 
are you thinkingabout him now 
I dont knowtell me what youre thinking abouttell mestop stop Quentinyou shut upyou shutup you hear me you shut upare you going to shut up 
all right I will stop well make toomuch noise 
Ill kill you do you hear 
lets go out to the swing theyll hear you here 
Im not crying do you say Im cryingno hush now well wake Benjyupyou go on into the house go on nowI am dont cry Im bad anyway youcant help ittheres a curse on usits not our fault is it our faulthush come on and go to bed nowyou cant make me theres a curse on usfinally I saw him he wasjust goinginto the barbershop he looked outI 
went on and waited 
Ive been looking for you two or three daysyou wanted to see meIm going tosee you 
he rolled the cigarette quickly with about two motions he struck the match 
with his thumb 
we cant talk here suppose I meet you somewhere 
Ill come to your room are you at the hotelno thatsnot so good you know that bridge over the creek in there back of 
yes all rightat one oclock right 
yesI turned awayIm obliged to you 


lookI stopped looked back 
she all righthe looked like he was made out of bronze his khaki shirt 
she need me for anythingnow 
Ill be there at oneshe heard me tell T. P. to saddle Prince at one oclock she kept watching me 
not eating much she came toowhat are you going to do 
nothing cant I go for a ride if I want to 
youre going to do something whatis itnone ofyourbusiness whore whore 

T.P. had Prince at the side door 
I wont want him Im going to walkI went down the drive and out the gate I turned into the lane then I ran 
before I reached the bridge I saw him leaning on the rail the horse was 
hitched in the woods he looked over his shoulder then he turned hisback 
he didnt look upuntil I came onto the bridge and stopped he had a piece of 
bark in his handsbreaking pieces from it and dropping them over the railinto the waterI came to tell you to leave town 
he broke a piece of bark deliberately dropped it carefully into the water 
watched it float away 
I said you must leave town 
he looked at me 
did she send you to meI say you must go not my father not anybody I sayitlisten save this for a while I want to know if shes all right have they been 
bothering her up therethats something you dont need to trouble yourself about 
then I heard myself saying Ill give youuntil sundown to leave town 
he broke a piece of bark and dropped it into the water then he laid the bark 
on the rail and rolled a cigarette with those two swift motions spun the 
match over the railwhat will you doif I dont leave 

Ill kill you dont think that justbecause I look like a kid to you 
the smoke flowed in two jetsfrom his nostrils across his face 
how old are youI began toshake my hands were on the rail I thought if I hid them hed 
know whyIll give you until tonight 
listen buddy whets your name Benjys the natural isnt he 
Quentinmy mouth said it I didnt say itat allQuentinhe raked the cigarette ash carefully off against the rail he did it slowly and 
carefully like sharpening aPencilmy hands had quit shakinglisten no good takingit so hard itsnot your fault kid it would have been 
some other fellow 
did you ever have a sister did you 
no but theyre all bitches 
I hit him my open handbeat the impulse to shut it to his face his hand 
moved as fast as mine the cigarette went over the rail I swung with the 
other hand he caughtit toobefore the cigarette reached the water he held 
both my wrists in the same hand his other hand flicked to his armpitunder 
his coatbehind him the sun slanted and a bird singing somewhere beyond 
the sun we looked at one another while the bird singing he turned my 
hands loose 
look herehe took the bark from the rail and dropped it into the water it bobbed up 
the current took it floated away his hand lay on the rail holding the pistolloosely we waited 
you cant hitit now 
noit floated on it was quite still in the woods I heard the bird again and the 
water afterward the pistol came up he didnt aim at all the bark disappeared 
then pieces of it floated up spreading he hit two more of them pieces of 
barkno bigger than silver dollars 
thats enough I guesshe swung the cylinder out and blew into the barrel a thin wisp of smoke 


dissolved he reloaded the three chambers shut the cylinder he handed it to 
me buttfirstwhat for I wont try to beat thatyoull need it from what yousaid Im giving you this one because youve seen 
what itll do 
to hell with your gun 
I hit him I was still trying to hit him long after he was holding my wrists 
but I still tried then it was like I was looking at him through a piece of 
colored glass I could hear my blood and then I could see the sky again and 
branchesagainstit and the sun slanting through them and he holding me 
on my feetdid you hitme 
I couldnt hear 
whatyes how do you feelall right let gohe let me go I leaned against the raildo you feel all right 
let me alone Im all rightcan you make it home all right 
go on let me aloneyoud better not try to walk take my horse 
no you go onyou can hang the reins on the pommel and turn him loose hell go back to 
the stablelet me alone you go on and let me alone 
I leaned on the rail looking at the water I heard him untie the horse and 
ride off and after a while I couldnthear anything but the water and then 
the bird again I left the bridge andsat down with my back against a tree 
and leaned my head against the tree and shut my eyes a Patch of sun came 
through and fell across my eyes and I moved a little further around the tree 
I heard the bird again and the water and then everything sort of rolled 
away and I didnt feel anything atall I felt almost good after all those days 
and the nights with honeysuckle comingup out of the darkness intomy 
room where I was trying to sleep even when after a while I knew that he 


hadnt hit me that he had lied about that for her sake too and that I had just 
passed out like a girl but even thatdidnt matter anymore and I sat there 
against the tree with little flecks of sunlightbrushing across my face like 
yellow leaves on a twig listening to the water and not thinkingabout 
anything at all even when Iheard the horse coming fast I sat there with my 
eyes closed and heard its feet bunch scuttering the hissing sandand feet 
running and her hard running hands 
fool fool are you hurtI opened my eyes her hands running on my face 
I didnt know which wayuntil I heard the pistol I didnt know where I didnt 
think he and you running off slipping I didnt think he would have 
she held my face between her hands bumping my head against the tree 
stop stop thatI caught her wrists 
quit that quit itI knew he wouldnt I knew he wouldnt 
she tried to bump my head against the tree 
I told him never to speak to me again I told himshe tried to break her wrists free 
let me gostop it Im stronger than you stop it now 
let me go Ive got to catch him andask his let me go Quentin please let me 
go let me go 
all at once she quit her wrists wentlax 
yes I can tell him I can make him believe anytime I can make himCaddyshe hadnt hitched Prince he was liable to strike out for home if the notion 
took him 
anytime he will believe me 
do you love him Caddy 
do I whatshe looked at me then everything emptied out of her eyes 
and they looked like the eyes in statues blankandunseeingand serene 
put your hand against my throatshe took my hand and held it flat against her throat 


now say hisname 
Dalton AmesI felt the first surge ofblood there it surged in strong acceleratingbeats 
say itagainher face looked off into the trees where the sun slanted and where the bird 
say itagainDalton Amesher blood surged steadily beatingand beating against my hand

 It dept on running for a long time, butmy face felt cold and sortof 
dead, and my eye, and the cut place on my finger was smarting again. I 
could hear Shreve working the pump, then he came back with the basinand a round blob of twilight wobblinginit, with a yellow edge like a fadingballoon, then my reflection. I tried to see my face in it.

 "Hasit stopped?"Shreve said. "Give me the rag."He tried to take it from 
my hand.

 "Look out," I said. "I can do it. Yes, it's about stopped now." I dipped the 
rag again,breaking the balloon. The rag stained the water. "I wish Ihad a 
clean one."

 "You need a piece ofbeefsteak for that eye," Shreve said."Damn if you 
wont have a shiner tomorrow. The son of abitch," he said.

 "Did I hurt him any?" I wrung out the handkerchief and tried to clean 
the blood off ofmy vest.

 "You cant get that off,"Shreve said. "You'll have to send it to the 
cleaner's. Come on, hold it on your eye, why dont you.

 "I can get some ofit off," I said. But I wasn't doing much good."What 
sort of shape is my collar in?"

 "I dont know," Shreve said. "Hold it against your eye. Here."

 "Look out," I said. "I can do it.Did I hurt him any?"

 "You may have hit him. Imay have looked away just then orblinked or 
something. He boxed the hell outof you.He boxed you all over the place. 
What did you want to fight him with your fists for? You goddam fool. How 
do you feel?"

 "I feel fine," I said. "I wonder ifI can get something to clean my vest."

 "Oh, forget your damn clothes.Does your eye hurt?"

 "I feelfine," I said. Everythingwas sort of violet and still, the skygreen 


palinginto gold beyond the gable of the house and a plume of smoke risingfrom the chimney without any wind. I heard the pump again. A man was 
filling a pail, watchingus across his pumping shoulder. A woman crossed 
the door, but she didn't look out. Icould hear a cow lowing somewhere.

 "Come on," Shreve said. "Let your clothes alone and put that rag on your 

eye. I'll send your suit out first thing tomorrow." 
"All right. I'm sorry I didn't bleed on him a little, at least." 
"Son of abitch," Shreve said. Spoade came out of the house, talking to 

the woman I reckon,and crossed the yard. He looked at me with hiscold, 
quizzical eyes.

 "Well, bud,"he said, lookingatme, "I'll be damned if you dont goto a 
lot of trouble to have your fun.Kidnapping, then fighting. What do you do 
on your holidays? burn houses?"

 "I'm all right," I said. "What did Mrs Bland say?"

 "She's givingGerald hell for bloodying youup. She'll give youhell for 
letting him, when she sees you. She dont object to the fighting, it's the 
blood that annoys her. I think youlost caste with her a little bynot holdingyour bloodbetter. How do you feel?"

 "Sure," Shreve said."If you cant be a Bland, the nextbest thingis to 
commit adultery with one or get drunk and fight him, as the case may be." 
"Quite right,"Spoade said. "But I didn't know Quentin was drunk." 
"He wasn't," Shreve said. "Do you have tobe drunk to want to hit that 

son ofa bitch?" 
"Well, I think I'd have to be pretty drunk to try it,after seeing how 

Quentin came out. Where'd he learn to box?" 
"He's been going toMike's every day, over in town," I said. 
"He has?"Spoade said."Did you know that when you hit him?" 
"I dont know," I said. "I guess so. Yes." 
"Wet it again," Shreve said. "Want some fresh water?" 
"This isall right," I said. I dipped the cloth again and held it to myeye. 

"Wish I had something to clean my vest." Spoade wasstill watchingme. 
"Say," he said. "What did youhit him for? What was it he said?" 
"I dont know. I dont know why I did." 
"The first I knew was when you jumped upall of a sudden and said, 'Did

you ever have a sister? did you?' and when he said No, you hit him. I 


noticed you kept on looking athim, but you didn't seem to be payingany 
attention to whatanybody wassayinguntil you jumped up and asked himif he had any sisters."

 "Ah, he wasblowing offas usual," Shreve said,"about his women.You 
know: like he does, before girls, sothey dont know exactly what he's saying. 
All his damn innuendo and lyingand a lot of stuff that dont make sense 
even. Telling usabout some wench that he made a date with to meetat a 
dance hall in Atlantic City and stood her up and went to the hotel and wentto bed and how he lay there beingsorry for her waiting on the pier for him, 
without him there to give her what she wanted. Talking about the body'sbeauty and the sorry ends thereof and how tough women have it, without 
anything else they can do except lie on their backs. Leda lurking in the 
bushes, whimpering and moaningfor the swan, see. The son of a bitch. I'dhit him myself.Only I'd grabbed up her damn hamper of wine and done it 
if it had been me."

 "Oh,"Spoade said, "the champion of dames.Bud, you excite not only 
admiration,buthorror." He looked at me, cold and quizzical."Good God," 
he said.

 "I'm sorry I hit him," I said. "Do I look too bad to goback and get it over 
with?"

 "Apologies, hell,"Shreve said. "Let them go to hell. We're going to 
town."

 "He ought to go back so they'll know he fights like a gentleman,"Spoade 
said. "Gets licked like one, I mean."

 "Like this?" Shreve said. "Withhis clothes all over blood?"

 "Why, all right," Spoade said. "You know best."

 "He cant goaround in hisundershirt,"Shreve said. "He's nota senior 
yet. Come on, let's go to town."

 "You needn't come," I said."You go on back to the picnic."

 "Hell with them," Shreve said. "Come on here."

 "What'll I tell them?" Spoade said. "Tell them you and Quentin had a 
fight too?"

 "Tell them nothing,"Shreve said. "Tell her her option expired at sunset. 
Come on, Quentin. I'll ask that woman where the nearest interurban--"

 "No," I said. "I'm not going back to town." 


 Shreve stopped, looking at me.Turning his glasses looked like smallyellow moons.

 "What are you going to do?"

 "I'm not goingback to town yet. You go on back to the picnic. Tell them I 
wouldn't come backbecause my clothes were spoiled."

 "Look here," he said. "What are youup to?"

 "Nothing. I'm all right. You and Spoade go on back. I'll see you 
tomorrow." I went on across the yard, toward the road.

 "Do you know where the stationis?"Shreve said.

 "I'll find it. I'll see you all tomorrow. Tell Mrs Bland I'm sorry I spoiledher party." They stood watchingme. I went around the house. A rockpathwent down to the road. Roses grew on both sides of the path. I wentthrough the gate, onto the road. It dropped downhill, toward the woods, 
and I could make out the autobeside the road. I went up the hill. The light 
increased as I mounted, and before I reached the topI heard a car. Itsounded far away across the twilight and I stopped and listened to it. I 
couldn't make out the auto any longer, but Shreve was standing in the road 
before the house, lookingup the hill. Behind him the yellow light lay like a 
wash of paint on the roof of the house. I lifted my hand and went on over 
the hill, listening to the car. Then the house was gone and I stopped in the 
green and yellow light and heard the car growing louder and louder, untiljustas itbegan to die awayit ceased alltogether. I waited until I heard it 
start again. Then I went on.

 As I descended the light dwindled slowly, yet at the same time without 
altering its quality, asif I and not light were changing, decreasing, though 
even when the road ran into treesyou could have read anewspaper. Pretty 
soon I came to a lane. I turned into it. It was closer and darker than the 
road, but when it came out at the trolley stop--another wooden marquee-the 
light was still unchanged. After the lane it seemed brighter, asthough I 
had walked throughnightin the lane and come out into morningagain.
Pretty soon the car came. I got on it, they turning to lookat my eye, and 
found a seat on the left side.

 The lights were on in the car, so while we ran between trees Icouldn't 
see anything except my own face and a woman across the aisle with a hat 
sitting right on top of her head, with a broken feather in it,but when we 


ran out of the trees I could see the twilight again, that quality of light as if 
time really had stopped for a while, with the sun hangingjustunder the 
horizon, and then we passed the marquee where the old man had been 
eating out of the sack, and the road going on under the twilight, into 
twilight and the sense of water peaceful and swift beyond. Then the car 
went on, the draft building steadily up in the open door until it was 
drawing steadily through the car with the odor of summer and darkness 
except honeysuckle.Honeysuckle was the saddest odor of all, I think. I 
remember lots of them. Wistaria wasone. On the rainy days when Mother 
wasn't feeling quite bad enough tostay away from the windows we used to 
play under it. When Mother stayedin bed Dilsey would put old clothes on 
us and let us go out in the rain because she said rain never hurt young 
folks. But if Mother was up we always began by playing on the porchuntilshe said we were making too much noise, then we went out and played 
under the wisteria frame.

 This was where I saw the river for the last time thismorning, about 
here. I couldfeel water beyond the twilight, smell. When it bloomed in the 
spring and it rained the smell waseverywhere you didn't notice it somuch 
at other times but when it rained the smell began to come into the house at 
twilight either it would rain more at twilight or there was somethingin the 
light itselfbut it always smelled strongest then until I would lie in bed 
thinking when willit stop when will it stop. The draft in the door smelled of 
water, a damp steady breath.Sometimes I could put myself to sleep sayingthat over and over until after the honeysuckle got all mixedup in it the 
whole thing came to symbolisnight and unrest I seemed to be lyingneither 
asleep nor awake looking down a long corridor of gray halflight where allstable thingshad become shadowy paradoxical all I had done shadows all Ihad felt suffered taking visible form antic and perverse mocking without 
relevance inherent themselves with the denial of the significance they 
should have affirmed thinking I was I was not who wasnot was not who.

 I could smell the curves of the river beyond the dusk and I saw the last 
light supine and tranquilupon tideflats like pieces ofbroken mirror, then 
beyond them lightsbegan in the pale clear air, trembling a little like 
butterflies hoveringa long way off. Benjamin the child of.How he used to 
sit before thatmirror. Refuge unfailing in which conflict tempered silenced 


reconciled. Benjamin the child ofmine old age held hostage intoEgypt. O 
Benjamin. Dilsey said it wasbecause Mother was too proud for him.They 
come into white people's lives like that in sudden sharp black trickles that 
isolate white facts for an instant in unarguable truth like under a 
microscope; the rest of the time just voices that laugh when you see 
nothing to laughat,tears when no reason for tears. They will bet on the 
odd or even number of mourners at a funeral. A brothel full of them inMemphis wentintoa religious trance ran naked into the street. It took 
three policemen to subdue one of them. Yes JesusO good man JesusOthat good man.

 The car stopped. I got out, with them looking at my eye. When the 
trolley came it was full. I stopped on the back platform.

 "Seatsup front," the conductorsaid. I looked into the car. There were no 
seats on the left side.

 "I'm not going far," I said. "I'll just stand here."

 We crossed the river. The bridge, that is, arching slow and high into 
space, between silence and nothingness where lights-- yellow and red and 
green--trembled in the clear air, repeating themselves.

 "Better go up front and get a seat," the conductor said.

 "I get off pretty soon," I said."A couple of blocks."

 I got off before we reached the postoffice. They'd all be sittingaround 
somewhere by now though, and then I was hearing my watchand Ibegan 
to listen for the chimesand I touched Shreve's letter through my coat, the 
bitten shadows of the elms flowing upon my hand. And then as I turned 
into the quad the chimes did begin and I went on while the notes came up 
like ripples on a pool and passedme and went on, sayingQuarter to what? 
All right. Quarter to what.

 Our windows were dark. The entrance was empty. I walked close to the 
left wall when I entered, but it was empty: just the stairs curvingup into 
shadows echoes of feet in the sad generations like light dustupon the 
shadows, my feet waking them like dust, lightly to settle again.

 I could see the letter before I turned the light on, propped againsta 
book on the table so I would see it.

 Calling him myhusband. And then Spoade said they were goingsomewhere, would not be back until late, and Mrs Bland would need 


another cavalier. But I would have seen him and he cannot get another car 
for an hour because after six oclock. I took out my watch and listened to it 
clickingaway,not knowing it couldn't even lie. Then I laid it face upon the 
table and took Mrs Bland's letter and tore it across and dropped the pieces 
into the waste basket and took offmy coat, vest, collar, tie and shirt. The tie 
was spoiled too, but then niggers.Maybe a pattern ofblood he could callthat the one Christ was wearing. Ifound the gasoline in Shreve's room and 
spread the vest on the table, where it would be flat, and opened the 
gasoline.

 the first car in town a girl Girl that's what Jason couldn't bear smell of 
gasoline making him sick then got madder than ever because a girl Girlhad no sister but Benjamin Benjamin the child of my sorrowful if I'd just 
had a mother so I could say Mother Mother It took a lot of gasoline,and 
then I couldn't tell if it was still the stain or just the gasoline. It had started 
the cut to smarting again so when I went to wash I hung the vest on a chairand lowered the light cord so that the bulb wouldbe drying the splotch. I 
washed my face and hands, but even then I could smell it within the soap 
stinging, constricting the nostrils alittle. Then I opened the bag and took 
the shirt and collar and tie outand put the bloody ones in and closed the 
bag,and dressed. While I was brushingmy hair the half hour went. But 
there was until the three quarters anyway, except suppose seeing on the 
rushing darkness only his own face no broken feather unless two of them 
but not two like that going to Boston the same night then my face his face 
for an instant across the crashing when out of darkness two lighted 
windows in rigid fleeing Being crash gone his face and mine just I see saw 
did I see not goodbye the marquee empty of eating the road empty indarkness in silence the bridge arching into silence darkness sleep the 
water peaceful and swift not goodbye

 I turned out the light and wentinto my bedroom, out of the gasoline but 
I could still smell it. I stood at the window the curtains moved slow out of 
the darkness touching my face like someone breathing asleep, breathingslow into the darkness again, leaving the touch. After they had gone up 
stairs Mother lay back in her chair, the camphor handker- chief to her 
mouth. Father hadn't moved he still sat beside her holding her hand the 
bellowing hammering away like no place for it in silence When Iwas 


little there was a picture in one ofour books, a dark place into whicha 
single weak ray of light came slantingupon two faces lifted out of the 
shadow. You know what I'd do if I were King? she never was a queen or a 
fairy she was alwaysa king or a giant or a general I'd break that place 
open and drag them out and I'd whip them good It was torn out,jagged 
out. I was glad. I'd have to turn back to it until the dungeon was Mother 
herself she and Father upward into weak light holding hands and uslost 
somewhere below even them without even a ray of light. Then the 
honeysuckle got into it. As soon asI turned off the light and tried to go to 
sleep it would begin to come into the room in wavesbuilding and buildingup until I would have to pant to get any air at all out of ituntil I would have 
to get up and feel my way like when I was a little boy hands can see 
touching in the mind shaping unseen door Door now nothing hands can 
see Mynose could see gasoline, the vest on the table, the door. The 
corridor was still empty of all the feet in sad generationsseeking water. 

yet the eyes unseeing clenched like teeth not disbelieving doubting even 
the absence of pain shin ankle knee the long invisible flowing of the stair-
railing where a misstep in the darkness filled with sleeping Mother Father 
Caddy Jason Maury door I am not afraid only Mother Father Caddy 
Jason Maury getting so far ahead sleeping I will sleep fast when I door 
Door door It was empty too, the pipes, the porcelain, the stained quiet 
walls, the throne of contemplation. I had forgotten the glass,but I could

hands can see cooling fingers invisible swan-throat where less than 
Moses rod the glass touch tentative not to drumming lean cool throat 
drumming cooling the metal the glass full overfull cooling the glass the 
fingers flushing sleep leaving the taste of dampened sleep in the long 
silence of the throat I returned up the corridor, waking the lost feet inwhisperingbattalions in the silence, into the gasoline, the watch telling its 
furious lie on the dark table. Then the curtains breathing out of the dark 
upon my face, leaving the breathing upon my face. A quarter hour yet. And 
then I'll not be. The peacefullest words. Peacefullest words. Non fui. Sum. 
Fui. Non sum. Somewhere I heard bells once. Mississippi or 
Massachusetts. I was. I am not. Massachusetts or Mississippi.Shreve has a 
bottle in his trunk.Aren't you even going to open it Mr and Mrs Jason 
Richmond Compson announce the Three times. Days. Aren't you even 


going to open it marriage of their daughter Candace that liquor teaches 
you to confuse the means with the end I am. Drink. I was not. Let us sellBenjy's pasture so that Quentin may goto Harvard and I mayknockmybones together and together. I will be dead in. Wasit one year Caddy said. 
Shreve has abottle in his trunk.Sir I will not need Shreve's I have soldBenjy's pasture and I can be dead in Harvard Caddy said in the caverns and 
the grottoes of the sea tumbling peacefully to the wavering tides because 
Harvard is such a fine sound fortyacres is no high price for a fine sound. A 
fine dead sound we will swap Benjy's pasture for a fine dead sound. It willlast him a long time because he cannot hear it unless he can smell itas 
soon as she came in the door he began to cry I thoughtall the time it 
was just one of those town squirtsthat Father was always teasingher about 
until. I didn't notice him anymore than any other stranger drummer orwhat thought they were army shirts until all ofa sudden I knew he wasn't 
thinking of me atall as aPotentialsource of harm but was thinking of her 
when he looked at me was lookingat me through her like through aPiece 
of colored glass why must you meddle with me dont you know it wont do 
any good I thought you'd have left that for Mother and Jason

did Mother set Jason to spy on you I wouldn't have.

 Women only use other people's codes of honor it's because she loves 
Caddy staying downstairs even when she was sick so Father couldn't kidUncle Maury before Jason Fathersaid Uncle Maury was too poor a 
classicist to risk the blind immortal boy in person he should have chosen 
Jason because Jason would have made only the same kind of blunder 
Uncle Maury himself would have made not one to get him ablack eye the 
Patterson boy was smaller than Jason too they sold the kitesfor a nickel a 
piece until the trouble over finances Jason got anew partner still smaller 
one small enoughanywaybecause T. P. said Jason still treasurer but 
Father said why should Uncle Maury work if he Father could supportfive 
or six niggers that did nothing at all but sit with their feet in the oven he 
certainly could board and lodge Uncle Maurynow and then and lend him alittle money who kept his Father'sbelief in the celestial derivation ofhis 
own species at such a fine heat then Mother would cry and say that Father 
believed his people were better than hers that he was ridiculing UncleMaury to teachus the same thing she couldn't see that Father was teaching 


us thatall men are justaccumulations dolls stuffed with sawdust swept up 
from the trash heaps where all previous dolls had been thrown awaythe 
sawdust flowingfrom what woundin whatside thatnot for me died not. It 
used to be I thought of death as aman something like Grandfather a friendof hisa kind of Private and particular friend like we used to think of 
Grandfather's desk not to touchitnot even to talk loud in the room where 
it was I always thought of them asbeing together somewhere all the time 
waiting for old ColonelSartoris tocome down and sit with them waiting on 
a high place beyond cedar trees Colonel Sartoris was on a still higher place 
looking out acrossat somethingand theywere waiting for him to get done 
looking at itand come down Grandfather wore his uniform and we couldhear the murmur of their voices from beyond the cedars they were always 
talking and Grandfather wasalways right

 The three quarters began. The first note sounded, measured and 
tranquil, serenely peremptory, emptying the unhurried silence for the next 
one and that's it if people could only change one another forever thatway 
merge like a flame swirlingup foran instant then blown cleanly outalong 
the cool eternal dark instead of Iying there tryingnot to think of the swinguntil all cedars came to have that vivid dead smell of perfume thatBenjy 
hated so. Just byimagining the clump it seemed to me that I could hear 
whispers secret surges smell the beating of hot bloodunder wild unsecret 
flesh watching against red eyelids the swine untethered in pairs rushingcoupled into the sea and he we must juststayawake and see evil done for a 
little while its notalwaysand iit doesnt have to be even that longfor a man 
of courage and he do you consider that courage and i yes sir dont you and 
he every man is the arbiter of his own virtues whether or not you consider 
it courageous is of more importance than the act itself than anyact 
otherwise you could not be in earnest and i you dontbelieve i am serious 
and he i think youare too serious to give me any cause for alarm you 
wouldnt have felt driven to the expedient of tellingme you had committed 
incest otherwise and i i wasnt lying i wasnt lying and he you wanted to 
sublimate a piece of natural human folly into ahorror and then exorcise it 
with truth and i it was to isolate her out of the loud world so that it wouldhave to flee us ofnecessity and then the sound of it would be as though ithad never been and he did you tryto make her do it andi i wasafraid to i 


was afraid she mightand then it wouldnt have done any good but ificouldtell you we did it would have been so and then the others wouldntbe so 
and then the world would roar away and he and now this other you are not 
lyingnow either but you are still blind to whatis in yourself to that part of 
general truth the sequence ofnatural events and their causes which 
shadows every mansbrow even benjys youare not thinking of finitude you 
are contemplating an apotheosis in which a temporary state of mind willbecome symmetricalabove the flesh and aware both ofitself and of the 
flesh it will not quite discard you will not even be dead and i temporary and 
he you cannotbear to think that someday it will no longer hurt you like this 
now were getting at it you seem toregard it merely as an experience that 
will whiten your hair overnight soto speak without altering your 
appearance at all you wont doit under these conditions it willbe a gambleand the strange thing is that man who is conceived byaccident and whose 
every breath is a fresh cast with dice already loaded against him willnot 
face that final main which he knows before hand he has assuredly to face 
without essaying expedients ranging all the way from violence to petty 
chicanery that would not deceive a child until somedayin very disgust he 
risks everything on asingle blind turn ofa card no man ever does that 
under the first fury of despair or remorse or bereavement he does it only 
when he has realised that even the despair or remorse or bereavement is 
not particularly important to the dark diceman and i temporaryandhe it ishard believing to think that a love or a sorrow is a bond purchased without 
design and which matures willynilly and is recalled without warning to be 
replaced by whatever issue the gods happen tobe floating at the time no 
you willnot do that until you come to believe that even she wasnot quite 
worth despair perhaps and i i will never do that nobody knows whati know 
and he i think youdbetter go on up to cambridge right away you might go 
up into maine for amonth you can afford it if youare careful it might be a 
good thing watching pennies hashealed more scars than jesus and isuppose i realise what you believe i will realise up there next week ornext 
month and he then you will remember that for you to go to harvardhas 
been your mothers dream since you were born and no compson has ever 
disappointed a lady and i temporary it will be better for me for all ofus and 
he every man is the arbiter of his own virtuesbut let no man prescribe for 


another mans wellbeingand i temporary and he was the saddest word of 
all there is nothing else in the world its not despairuntil time its noteven 
time untilit was

 The last note sounded. At last it stopped vibrating and the darkness was 
still again. I entered the sitting room and turned on the light. I put my vest 
on. The gasoline was faint now, barely noticeable, and in the mirror the 
stain didn't show. Not like my eye did, anyway. I put on my coat.Shreve's 
letter crackled through the cloth and I took it out and examined the 
address, and put itin my side pocket. Then I carried the watch into 
Shreve's room and put itin his drawer and went to my room and got a 
fresh handkerchiefand went to the door and put my hand on the light 
switch. Then I remembered I hadn't brushed my teeth, so I had to open the 
bag again. I found my toothbrushand got some ofShreve's paste and wentout and brushed my teeth. I squeezed the brush asdry as I could and put itbackin the bag and shut it, and went to the door again. Before I snapped 
the light out I looked around to see if there was anything else, then Isaw 
that I had forgotten my hat. I'd have to go by the postoffice and I'd be sure 
to meet some of them, and they'd think I was aHarvard Square student 
making like he was a senior. I hadforgotten to brush it too,but Shreve had 
a brush, so I didn't have to open the bag any more. 


April 6, 1928 

Once a bitch always abitch, what I say. I says you're luckyif her playingout of schoolis all that worries you. I says she ought to be down there in 
that kitchen right now, instead ofup there in her room, gobbing paint on 
her face and waitingfor sixniggers that cant even stand up out of a chairunless they've got a pan full ofbread and meat tobalance them, to fixbreakfast for her. And Mother says,

 "But to have the school authorities think that Ihave no control over her, 
that I cant--"

 "Well," I says."You cant, can you? Younever have tried to do anythingwith her," I says. "How do you expect to begin this late, when she's 
seventeen years old?"

 She thoughtabout thatfor a while.

 "But to have them think that ... I didn't even know she had a report 
card. She told me last fall that they had quitusing them this year. And now 
for Professor Junkin to call me on the telephone and tell me if she's absent 
one more time, she will have to leave school. How does she do it? Where 
does she go? You're down town allday; you ought to see her if she stays on 
the streets."

 "Yes," I says. "Ifshe stayed on the streets. I dont reckon she'd be 
playing out of school just to do somethingshe could do in public," Isays.

 "What do you mean?" she says.

 "I dont mean anything," I says."I just answered your question." Then 
she begun to cry again, talking about how her own flesh and blood rose up 
to curse her.

 "You asked me," I says.

 "I dont mean you," she says. "You are the only one of them that isn't a 
reproach to me."

 "Sure," I says."I never had time to be. I never had time to go to Harvard 
or drink myselfinto the ground. Ihad to work. But of course if you want 
me to follow her around and see what she does, I can quit the store and get 
a job where I can work at night. Then I can watch her during the dayand 
you can use Ben for the night shift."

 "I know I'm just a trouble and a burden to you,"she says, crying on the 


pillow.

 "I ought to know it," I says. "You've been tellingme thatfor thirty years. 
Even Ben ought toknowit now. Do you want me to sayanything to her 
about it?"

 "Do you think it will do any good?" she says.

 "Not if you come down there interfering just when I get started," I says. 
"If you want me to control her, just say so and keep your hands off. 
Everytime I try to, you come butting in and then she givesboth ofus the 
laugh."

 "Remember she's your own flesh and blood," she says.

 "Sure," I says,"that'sjust whatI'm thinking of--flesh. Anda little blood 
too, if I had my way. When people act like niggers, no matter who they are 
the only thing to do is treat them like a nigger."

 "I'm afraid you'll lose your temper with her," she says.

 "Well," I says."Youhaven't had much luck with your system. You want 
me to do anythingabout it, ornot? Say one way or the other; I've got to get 
on to work."

 "I know you have to slave yourlife awayfor us," she says. "You know if I 
had my way, you'd have an office of your own to go to,and hours thatbecame a Bascomb. Because youare a Bascomb, despite your name.I know 
that if your father could have foreseen--"

 "Well," I says,"I reckon he's entitled to guess wrong nowand then, like 
anybody else, even a Smith or aJones."She begun to cry again.

 "To hear you speakbitterly of your dead father," she says.

 "All right," I says,"all right.Have it your way. But as I haven't gotan 
office, I'll have to get on to what Ihave got. Do you want me to say 
anything to her?"

 "I'm afraid you'll lose your temper with her," she says.

 "All right," I says."I wont say anything, then."

 "But something must be done," she says."To have people think Ipermither to stay out of school and run about the streets, or that I cant prevent 
her doing it.... Jason, Jason," she says. "How could you. How could you 
leave me with these burdens."

 "Now, now," I says. "You'll make yourself sick. Why dont you either lock 
her up all day too, or turn her over to me and quit worrying over her?" 


 "My own fleshandblood," she says, crying. So I says,

 "All right. I'll tend to her. Quitcrying, now."

 "Dont lose your temper," she says. "She's just a child, remember."

 "No," I says. "I wont." I went out, closing the door.

 "Jason,"she says. I didn't answer. I went down the hall. "Jason," she 
saysbeyond the door. I went on down stairs. There wasn't anybody in the 
diningroom, then I heard her in the kitchen. She was trying to make Dilsey 
let her have another cup of coffee.I went in.

 "I reckon that's your school costume, isit?" I says."Or maybe today's a 
holiday?"

 "Justa half a cup, Dilsey," she says. "Please."

 "No, suh," Dilsey says."I aint gwine do it. Youaint got no business wid 
mo'n one cup,a seventeen year old gal, let lone whut Miss Cahline say. You 
go on and git dressed for school, so you kin ride to town widJason.You 
fixin tobe late again."

 "No she's not," I says."We're going to fix that rightnow."She looked at 
me, the cup in her hand. She brushed her hair back from her face, her 
kimono slipping off her shoulder. "You put that cup down and come in 
here a minute," I says.

 "What for?" she says.

 "Come on," I says. "Put that cup in the sinkand come in here."

 "What you up tonow, Jason?"Dilsey says.

 "You may think you can run over me like you do your grandmother and 
everybody else," I says."But you'llfind out different. I'll give you ten 
seconds to put that cup down like I told you."

 She quit lookingat me. She looked at Dilsey. "What timeis it, Dilsey?" 
she says."When it's ten seconds, you whistle.Justa halfa cup. Dilsey, pl--"

 I grabbed her by the arm.She dropped the cup. It broke on the floor 
and she jerked back, looking atme, but I held her arm. Dilsey gotupfrom 
her chair.

 "You, Jason," she says.

 "You turn me loose,"Quentin says. "I'll slap you."

 "You will, will you?" I says."You will will you?"She slapped at me. I 
caught that hand too and held her like a wildcat. "You will, will you?"I 
says."You think you will?" 


 "You, Jason!" Dilsey says. I dragged her into the diningroom.Her 
kimono came unfastened, flapping about her, dam nearnaked. Dilsey came 
hobbling along. I turned and kicked the door shut in her face.

 "You keep out ofhere," I says.

 Quentin was leaningagainst the table, fastening her kimono. I looked at 
her.

 "Now," I says."I want to know what youmean, playing out of schooland tellingyour grandmother liesand forging her name on your report and 
worrying her sick. What do you mean by it?"

 She didn't say anything.She was fastening her kimono upunder her 
chin, pulling it tight around her, looking at me. She hadn't got around to 
painting herself yet and her face looked like she had polished it witha gun 
rag. I went and grabbed her wrist."What do you mean?" I says.

 "None of your damn business," she says."You turn me loose."

Dilsey came in the door. "You,Jason,"she says.

 "You get out of here, like I told you," I says,not even lookingback. "I 
want to know where you go when you play out of school," I says. "You keep 
off the streets, or I'd see you. Who do you play out with? Are you hiding out 
in the woods with one of those dam slick-headed jellybeans? Is thatwhere 
you go?"

 "You--you old goddam!" she says. She fought,but I held her. "You 
damn old goddam!" she says.

 "I'll show you," I says."Youmay can scare an old woman off,but I'llshow you who's got hold of younow." I held her with one hand, then she 
quit fighting and watched me, her eyes getting wide and black.

 "What are you going to do?" she says.

 "You waituntil I get this belt out and I'll show you," Isays, pulling my 
belt out. Then Dilsey grabbed myarm.

 "Jason,"she says. "You, Jason!Aint you shamed of yourself."

 "Dilsey,"Quentin says. "Dilsey."

 "I aint gwine let him," Dilsey says. "Dont you worry, honey."She held to 
my arm. Then the belt came out and I jerked loose and flung her away. She 
stumbled into the table. She was so old she couldn't do any more than 
move hardly. But that's all right: we need somebody in the kitchen toeat 
up the grub the young ones cant tote off. She came hobbling between us, 


trying to hold me again. "Hitme, den," she says,"ef nothin else but hittin

somebody wont do you.Hit me," she says. 
"You think I wont?" I says. 
"I dont put no devilmentbeyond you," she says. Then I heard Mother 

on the stairs. I might have known she wasn't going to keep out of it. Ilet go. 
She stumbled back against the wall, holding her kimono shut.

 "All right," I says."We'll just put this offa while. But dont think you can 
run it over me. I'm notan old woman,nor an old half dead nigger, either. 
You dam little slut," I says.

 "Dilsey," she says."Dilsey, I want my mother."
Dilsey went to her. "Now, now," she says. "He aint gwine so much as lay 

his hand on you while Ise here." Mother came on down the stairs. 
"Jason,"she says. "Dilsey." 
"Now, now," Dilsey says."I aint gwine let him tech you."She put her 

hand on Quentin.She knocked it down. 
"You damn old nigger," she says. She ran toward the door. 
"Dilsey," Mother says on the stairs. Quentin ran up the stairs, passing

her. "Quentin," Mother says."You, Quentin." Quentin ran on. I couldhear 

her when she reached the top, then in the hall. Then the door slammed. 
Mother had stopped. Then she came on. "Dilsey," she says. 
"All right," Dilsey says. "Ise comin. You go on and git dat car and wait

now," she says,"so you kin cahy her to school." 
"dont you worry," I says."I'll take her to school and I'm going to see 

that she stays there. I've started this thing, and I'm going through with it." 
"Jason,"Mother says on the stairs. 
"Go on,now," Dilsey says, going toward the door. "You want to git her 

started too? Ise comin, Miss Cahline."

 I went on out. I could hear them on the steps. "You go on back to bed 
now," Dilsey wassaying. "dont you know you aint feeling well enough to gitup yet? Go on back, now. I'm gwine to see she gits to school in time."

 I went on out the back to back the car out, then I had to go all the way 

round to the frontbefore I found them. 
"I thought I told you to put that tire on the back of the car," I says. 
"I aint had time," Luster says. "Aintnobody to watch him till mammy 

git done in de kitchen." 


 "Yes," I says. "I feed a whole dam kitchen full ofniggers to follow 
aroundafter him,butif I want an automobile tire changed, I have to do itmyself."

 "I aint had nobody to leave him wid," he says. Then he begun moaning 
and slobbering.

 "Take him on round to the back," I says. "What the hell makesyou want 
to keep him around here where people can see him?" I made them go on, 
before he got started bellowing good. It's bad enough on Sundays, with that 
dam field full of people that haven't got a side show and sixniggers to feed, 
knocking a dam oversize mothball around.He's going to keep on running 
up and down that fence and bellowing every time they come in sight untilfirst thing I know they're going tobegin charging me golf dues, then 
Mother and Dilsey'll have to get acouple of china door knobs and a 
walking stickand work it out, unless I play atnight with a lantern. Then 
they'd send us all to Jackson,maybe. God knows, they'd hold Old Home 
week when that happened.

 I went on back to the garage. There was the tire, leaningagainst the 
wall, butbe damned if I was goingto put it on. I backed out and turned 
around.She was standingby the drive. I says,

 "I know you haven't got anybooks: I just want to ask you what you did 
with them, ifit's any of my business. Of course I haven't got any rightto 
ask," I says."I'm just the one thatpaid $11.65 for them lastSeptember."

 "Mother buys mybooks," she says. "There's not a cent of your money on 
me. I'd starve first."

 "Yes?" I says. "You tell your grandmother that and see what she says. 
You dont lookall the way naked," I says, "even if that stuff on your face 
does hide more of you than anything else you've got on."

 "Do you think your money or hers either paid for a cent of this?" she 
says.

 "Ask your grandmother," Isays. "Ask her whatbecame of those checks.
You saw her burn one of them,as I remember." She wasn't even listening, 
with her face all gummed up withpaintand her eyes hard as afice dog's.

 "Do you know what I'd do if I thought your money or hers either bought 
one cent of this?" she says, putting her hand on her dress.

 "What would you do?" I says. "Wear a barrel?" 


 "I'd tear it right off and throw it into the street," she says. "dont you 
believe me?"

 "Sure you would," I says."You do it everytime."

 "See if I wouldn't," she says.She grabbed the neck of her dress in both 
hands and made like she would tear it.

 "You tear that dress," I says,"and I'll give you a whipping right here 
that you'll remember all your life."

 "See if I dont," she says. Then Isaw that she really was trying to tear it, 
to tear it right off of her. By the time I got the car stopped and grabbed herhands there was about a dozen people looking. It made me so mad for a 
minute it kind of blinded me.

 "You do a thing like that again and I'll make you sorry you ever drew 
breath," I says.

 "I'm sorry now," she says. She quit, then her eyes turned kind of funny 
and I says to myselfif you cry here in this car, on the street, I'll whip you. 
I'll wearyou out. Luckyfor her she didn't, so I turned her wrists loose and 
drove on. Luckily we were near an alley, where I could turn into the back 
street and dodge the square. They were already putting the tentup inBeard's lot. Earl had already given me the two passes for our show 
windows. She sat there with her face turned away, chewing her lip."I'msorry now," she says. "I dont see why I was ever born."

 "And I know of at least one other person that dont understand allhe 
knows about that," I says. Istopped in front of the school house. The bellhad rung,and the last of them were just goingin."You're on time foronce, 
anyway," I says."Are you goingin there and stay there, or am I coming 
with youand make you?"She gotout and banged the door. "Remember 
what I say," I says. "I mean it. Let me hear one more time that you are 
slipping up and down back alleyswith one of those dam squirts."

 She turned back at that."I dont slip around," she says."I dare anybody 
to know everything I do."

 "And they all know it, too," I says. "Everybody in this town knowswhatyou are. But I wont have it anymore, you hear? I dont care what youdo,
myself," I says."But I've got a position in this town,and I'm not going to 
have anymember of my family going on like anigger wench. Youhear 
me?" 


 "I dont care," she says. "I'm bad and I'm going tohell, and I dontcare. 
I'd rather be in hell than anywhere where you are."

 "If I hear one more time that you haven't been to school, you'll wish you 
were in hell," I says.She turned and ran on across the yard. "One more 
time, remember," I says. She didn't look back.

 I went to the postoffice and gotthe mail and drove on to the store and 
parked. Earl looked at me when I came in. I gave him a chance to say 
something aboutmy being late, but he just said,

 "Those cultivators have come. You'd better help Uncle Job put them 
up."

 I went on to the back, where old Job wasuncrating them, at the rate of 
about three bolts to the hour.

 "You ought to be working for me," I says."Every other no-countnigger 
in town eats in my kitchen."

 "I works to suit de man whut pays me Sat'dy night," he says. "When I 
does cat, it dont leave me a whole lot of time to please other folks." He 
screwed up a nut. "Aint nobody works much in dis country cep de boll-
weevil, noways," he says.

 "You'd better be glad you're not a boll-weevil waiting on those 
cultivators," I says. "You'd work yourself to death before they'd be ready to 
prevent you."

 "Dat's de troof," he says."Boll-weevil got tough time. Work ev'y day inde week out in de hot sun, rain er shine. Aint gotno front porch to set on 
en watch de wattermilyuns growin and Sat'dy dont mean nothin a-tall to 
him."

 "Saturday wouldn't meannothing to you, either," I says, "ifit depended 
on me to pay you wages.Get those things out of the crates now and drag 
them inside."

 I opened her letter first and took the check out. Just like a woman. Sixdays late. Yet they try to make men believe that they're capable of 
conducting abusiness. How longwould a man that thought the firstof the 
month came on the sixth lastin business.And like as not, when theysent 
the bank statement out, she would want to know why I never deposited my 
salary until the sixth. Things like that never occur to a woman. 


"I had noanswer to my letter about Quentin's easter dress. Did it arrive all 
right? I've had no answer to the last two letters I wrote her, though the 
check in the second one was cashed with the other check. Is she sick? Let 
me know at once or I'll come there and see for myself. You promisedyou 
would let me know when she needed things. I will expect to hear from you 
before the 10th. No you'd better wire me at once. You are opening my 
letters to her. I know that as well as if I were lookingat you. You'd better 
wire me at once about her to thisaddress." 

About that time Earl started yelling atJob, so I put them awayand went 
over to try to put some life intohim. What this country needs is white 
labor. Let these dam trifling niggers starve for a couple of years, then 
they'd see what a soft thing they have.

Along toward ten oclock I went up front. There was a drummer there. It 
was a couple of minutes to ten,and I invited him up the street to get a 
dope. We got to talking about crops.

 "There's nothing to it," I says. "Cotton is a speculator's crop. They fillthe farmer full of hotair and get him to raise abig crop for them to 
whipsaw on the market, to trim the suckers with. Do you think the farmer 
gets anything out ofit except a red neck and a humpin hisback? You think 
the man that sweats to put it into the ground gets a red cent more than a 
bare living," I says."Let him make a big crop and it wontbe worth picking; 
let him make a small crop and he wont have enough to gin. And what for? 
so a bunch of dam eastern jews I'm not talking about men of the jewish 
religion," I says. "I've known somejews that were fine citizens. Youmight 
be one yourself," I says.

 "No," he says."I'm an American."

 "No offense," I says. "I give every man his due, regardless of religion or 
anything else. I have nothingagainst jews as an individual," Isays."It's just 
the race. You'll admit that they produce nothing. They follow the pioneers 
into anew country and sell them clothes."

 "You're thinking of Armenians," he says,"aren't you. A pioneer wouldn't 
have anyuse fornew clothes."

 "No offense," I says. "I dont hold a man's religion against him." 


 "Sure,"he says."I'm an American. Myfolks have some French blood, 
why I have a nose like this. I'm an American,all right."

 "So am I," I says. "Not many ofus left. What I'm talking about is the 
fellows that situp there in New York and trim the sucker gamblers."

 "That's right," he says."Nothing to gambling,for a poor man. There 
ought tobe a law against it."

 "dont you think I'm right?" I says.

 "Yes," he says. "I guess you're right. The farmer catches it comingand 
going."

 "I know I'm right," I says. "It'sa sucker game,unlessa man gets inside 
information from somebody that knows what's going on. I happen to be 
associated withsome people who're right there on the ground. Theyhave 
one of the biggest manipulatorsin New York for an adviser. Way I doit," I 
says,"I never risk much at a time.It's the fellow that thinks he knowsit alland is trying to make akilling with three dollars that they're laying for. 
That's why they are in the business."

 Then it struck ten. I wentup tothe telegraph office. It opened up a 
little, just like they said. I went into the corner and took out the telegram 
again, just tobe sure. While I was looking at ita report came in. It was up 
two points. They were all buying. I could tell that from what they were 
saying.Gettingaboard. Like they didn't knowit could go but one way. Like 
there was a law or something against doing anythingbutbuying. Well, I 
reckon those eastern jews have got to live too. But I'll be damned if ithasn't 
come to a pretty pass when any dam foreigner that cant make a living inthe country where God put him, can come to this one and take money right 
out of an American's pockets. It was up two points more. Four points. But 
hell, they were right there and knew what was going on.And if I wasn't 
going to take the advice, what wasI paying them ten dollars amonthfor. Iwent out, then I remembered and came backand sent the wire. "Allwell. Q 
writing today."

 "Q?" the operator says.

 "Yes," I says. "Q.Cant youspell Q?"

 "I justasked to be sure," he says.

 "You send it like I wrote it andI'll guarantee you to be sure," I says. 
"Send it collect." 


 "What you sending, Jason?" Doc Wright says, looking over my 
shoulder. "Is that a code message to buy?"

 "That's all right about that," I says. "Youboysuse your own judgment. 
You know more about it than those New York folks do."

 "Well, I ought to," Doc says. "I'd a saved money this year raisingit at 
two cents a pound."

 Another report came in. It wasdown a point.

 "Jason's selling,"Hopkinssays. "Look at his face."

 "That's all right about what I'm doing," Isays."You boys follow your 
own judgment. Those rich New York jews have got to live like everybody 
else," I says.

 I went on back to the store. Earl was busyup front. I went on back to 
the desk and read Lorraine's letter. "Dear daddy wish you were here. No 
good parties when daddys out of town I miss my sweet daddy." I reckon 
she does. Last time I gave her forty dollars. Gave it to her. I never promise 
a woman anythingnor let her know what I'm going to give her. That's the 
only way to manage them. Alwayskeep them guessing. If you cant think of 
any other way to surprise them, give them a bust in the jaw.

 I tore it up and burned it over the spittoon. I make ita rule never to 
keep a scrap of paper bearing a woman's hand, and I never write them at 
all. Lorraine isalwaysafter me to write to her but I saysanything I forgot 
to tell you will save till I get to Memphis again but I says I dontmind you 
writing me now and then in a plain envelope, but if you ever try to call meup on the telephone, Memphis wont hold you I says. I says when I'm up 
there I'm one of the boys,but I'm not going to have any woman calling me 
on the telephone. Here I says, giving her the forty dollars. If you ever get 
drunk and take anotion to call me on the phone,just remember thisand 
count ten before you doit.

 "When'll that be?" she says.

 "What?" I says.

 "When you're coming back,"she says.

 "I'll let you know," Isays. Then she tried to buya beer, but I wouldn't lether. "Keep your money," I says."Buy yourself a dress with it." I gave the 
maid a five, too. After all, like I say money has no value; it'sjust the way 
you spend it. It dont belong to anybody, so why try to hoard it. Itjust 


belongs to the man that can get itand keep it. There's a man right here in 
Jefferson made a lot of money selling rotten goods to niggers, lived in a 
room over the store about the size of a pigpen,and did his own cooking. 
About four or five years ago he was taken sick. Scared the hell out of him so 
that when he wasup again he joined the church and bought himselfa 
Chinese missionary, five thousanddollars a year. I often thinkhow mad 
he'll be if he was to die and find out there's not any heaven, when he thinks 
about thatfive thousand a year. Like I say, he'd better go on and die now 
and save money.

 When it was burned good I wasjustabout to shove the others into my 
coat when all of asudden something told me to open Quentin's before I 
went home, but about that time Earl started yelling for me up front, so I 
put them away and wentand waited on the dam redneck while he spent 
fifteen minutes deciding whether he wanted a twenty cent hame string or a 
thirty-five cent one.

 "You'd better take that good one," I says."How do you fellows ever 
expect to get ahead, trying to work with cheap equipment?"

 "If this one aint any good," he says, "why have you got it on sale?"

 "I didn't say it wasn't any good," I says."I said it's not as good as that 
other one."

 "How do you know it'snot,"he says."You ever use airy one of them?"

 "Because they dontask thirty-five cents for it," I says. "That's how I 
know it'snot as good."

 He held the twenty cent one in his hands, drawing it through hisfingers."I reckon I'll take thishyer one," he says. I offered to take it and 
wrap it, but he rolled it up and putit in his overalls. Then he took out a 
tobacco sackand finally got ituntied and shook some coins out. He handed 
me a quarter. "That fifteen cents will buy me a snack of dinner," he says.

 "All right," I says."You're the doctor. But dont come complainingto me 
next year when you have tobuy anew outfit."

 "I aint makin next year's crop yit," he says. Finally I got rid of him, but 
every time I took that letter out something would come up. They were all intown for the show, coming in in droves to give their money to somethingthat brought nothing to the town and wouldn't leave anything except what 
those grafters in the Mayor's office will split among themselves, and Earl 


chasing back and forth like a hen in a coop, saying "Yes, ma'am, Mr 
Compson will wait on you. Jason,show this ladya churn or anickel's worth 
of screen hooks."

 Well, Jason likes work. I saysno I never had university advantages 
because at Harvard they teach you how to go for a swim atnight without 
knowing how to swim and at Sewanee they dont even teach you what water 
is. I says youmight send me to the state University; maybe I'll learn how to 
stop my clock with anose spray and then you can send Ben to the Navy Isays or to the cavalry anyway, they use geldingsin the cavalry. Then when 
she sent Quentin home forme to feed too I says I guess that's right too, 
instead of me having to go wayupnorth for a job they sent the job down 
here to me and then Mother begun to cry and I says it'snot that I have any 
objection to havingit here; ifit's any satisfaction to you I'll quit work and 
nurse itmyself and let you and Dilsey keep the flour barrel full, or Ben. 
Rent him out to asideshow; there mustbe folks somewhere that would pay 
a dime to see him, then she cried more and kept saying my poor afflicted 
baby and I saysyes he'll be quite ahelp to you when he gets his growth not 
being more than one and a half times as high as me now and she says she'd 
be dead soon and then we'd all be better off and so I saysall right, allright, 
have it your way. It's your grandchild, which is more than any other 
grandparentsit's got can say for certain.Only I saysit's only a question of 
time. If you believe she'll do whatshe says and not try to see it, you foolyourself because the first time that was the Mother kept on saying thank 
God youare not a Compson exceptin name,because you are all I have left 
now, youand Maury and I says well I could spare Uncle Maury myself and 
then they came and said they were ready to start. Mother stopped cryingthen. She pulled her veil down and we went down stairs. Uncle Maury was 
coming out of the diningroom, hishandkerchief to his mouth. They kind of 
made a lane and we went out the door justin time to see Dilsey driving Ben 
and T. P. back around the corner. We went down the steps and got in.
Uncle Maury kept sayingPoor little sister, poor little sister, talking around 
his mouth and patting Mother's hand. Talking around whatever it was.

 "Have you got your band on?" she says. "Why dont they go on, before 
Benjamin comes out and makesaspectacle. Poor little boy. He doesn't 
know. He cant even realise." 


 "There, there," Uncle Maury says, patting her hand, talking around hismouth."It's better so. Let him be unaware ofbereavement until he has to."

 "Other women have their children to support them in times like this," 
Mother says.

 "You have Jason and me," he says.

 "It's so terrible to me," she says. "Having the two of them like this,inless than two years."

 "There, there," he says. After a while he kind ofsneaked his handto hismouthand dropped them out the window. Then I knew what I hadbeen 
smelling. Clove stems. I reckon he thought that the least he could do at 
Father's or maybe the sideboard thought it was still Father and tripped himup when he passed. Like I say, if he had to sell something to send Quentinto Harvard we'd all been a dam sight better off if he'd sold that sideboard 
and bought himselfa one-armed strait jacket with part of the money. I 
reckon the reason all the Compson gave out before it got tome like Mother 
says, is that he drank itup. At least I never heard of him offering to sellanything to send me to Harvard.

 So he kept on patting her hand and saying "Poor little sister", pattingher hand with one of the black gloves thatwe got the bill for four days later 
because it was the twenty-sixth because it was the same day one monththat Father went up there and got it and brought it home and wouldn't tellanything about where she was or anything and Mother cryingand saying"Andyou didn't even see him? You didn't even try to get him to make any 
provision for it?"and Father says"No she shall not touch his moneynot 
one cent of it" and Mother says"He can be forced to by law.He can prove 
nothing,unless--Jason Compson," she says."Were you fool enough to tell-"


 "Hush, Caroline," Father says, then he sent me to help Dilsey get that 
old cradle out of the attic and I says,

 "Well, they brought myjob home tonight"because all the time we kept 
hoping they'd get things straightened out and he'dfool keep her because 
Mother kept saying she would at least have enough regard for the familynot to jeopardise my chance after she and Quentin had had theirs.

 "And whar else do she belong?"Dilsey says. "Who else gwine raise her 
cep me? Aint I raised ev'y one of y'all?" 


 "And a dam fine job you made of it," I says."Anywayit'll give her 
something to sure enough worry over now." So we carried the cradle down 
and Dilsey started to set it up in her old room. Then Mother started sure 
enough.

 "Hush, Miss Cahline," Dilsey says. "You gwine wake her up."

 "In there?" Mother says. "To be contaminated by thatatmosphere? It'llbe hard enough asit is, with the heritage she already has."

 "Hush," Father says."dontbe silly."

 "Why aint she gwine sleep in here," Dilsey says."In the same room 
whar I put her maw to bed ev'y night of her life since she was big enough to 
sleep by herself."

 "You dont know,"Mother says."To have my own daughter cast offby 
her husband. Poor little innocentbaby," she says, lookingat Quentin."You 
will never know the suffering you've caused."

 "Hush, Caroline," Father says.

 "What you want to go on like that fo Jason fer?" Dilsey says.

 "I've tried to protect him," Mother says. "I've always tried to protect himfrom it. At least I can do mybest to shield her."

 "How sleepinin dis room gwine hurt her, I like to know," Dilsey says.

 "I cant help it," Mother says."Iknow I'm just a troublesome oldwoman.But I know that people cannotfloutGod's laws withimpunity."

 "Nonsense," Father says. "Fixitin Miss Caroline's room then, Dilsey."

 "You can saynonsense," Mother says. "But she mustnever know.She 
mustnever even learn that name.Dilsey, I forbid you ever to speak that 
name in her hearing. If she could grow up never to know that she had a 
mother, I would thank God."

 "dont be a fool," Father says.

 "I have never interfered with the way youbrought them up," Mother 
says."But now I cannot standanymore. We must decide this now, tonight. 
Either thatname is never to be spoken in her hearing, or she must go, or I 
will go. Take your choice."

 "Hush," Father says."You're just upset. Fixit in here, Dilsey."

 "En you's about sick too," Dilsey says."You looks like a hant. Yougit inbed and I'll fix youa toddy and see kin you sleep. I bet you aint had afullnight's sleep since you lef." 


 "No," Mother says."dont you know what the doctor says? Whymust 
you encourage him to drink? That's what's the matter with him now.Look 
at me, I suffer too, but I'm not soweak that I must kill myself with 
whiskey."

 "Fiddlesticks," Father says."What do doctors know? They make their 
livings advising people to do whatever they are not doing at the time, which 
is the extent ofanyone's knowledge of the degenerate ape. You'll have a 
minister in to hold my hand next." Then Mother cried, and he went out. 
Went down stairs, and then I heard the sideboard. I woke up andheard 
him going down again. Mother had gone to sleep or something,because 
the house was quiet at last. He was trying tobe quiet too, because I 
couldn't hear him, only the bottom of hisnightshirt and hisbare legsinfront of the sideboard.

Dilsey fixed the cradle and undressed her and put her in it.She never 
had waked up since he brought her in the house.

 "She pretty near too big fer hit," Dilsey says."Dar now. I gwine spread 
me a pallet right across de hall, soyou wontneed to git upin de night."

 "I wont sleep," Mother says."You go on home. I wont mind. I'll be 
happy to give the rest of my life to her, if I can just prevent--"

 "Hush, now," Dilsey says."We gwine take keer of her. En you goon to 
bed too," she says to me. "You gotto go to school tomorrow."

 So I went out, then Mother called me back and cried on me a while.

 "You are my only hope," she says. "Every night I thank God for you." 
While we were waiting there for them to start she says ThankGod if he had 
to be taken too, it isyou left me and not Quentin. ThankGod youare not a 
Compson,because all I have left now is youand Maury and I says, Well I 
could spare Uncle Maury myself.Well, he kept on pattingher handwith 
his black glove, talkingaway from her. He took them off when his turn with 
the shovel came. He got upnear the first, where they were holding the 
umbrellas over them, stamping every now and then and trying to kick the 
mud off their feet and sticking to the shovels so they'd have to knockit off, 
making ahollow sound when itfell on it, and when I stepped backaround 
the hack I could see him behind a tombstone, takinganother one outof a 
bottle. I thought he never was going to stop because I had on mynewsuittoo, butit happened that there wasn't much mud on the wheels yet, only 


Mother saw it and says I dont know when you'll ever have another one and 
Uncle Maury says, "Now,now. Dont you worry atall. You have me to 
depend on, always."

 And we have. Always. The fourth letter was from him. But there wasn't 
anyneed to open it. I could have written it myself, or recited it to her from 
memory, adding ten dollars just to be safe. But I had a hunch about that 
other letter. I just felt that it wasabout time she wasup to some of her 
tricks again.She got pretty wise after that first time.She found out pretty 
quick that I was a different breed of cat from Father. When theybegun to 
get it filled up toward the top Mother started crying sure enough, soUncleMaury gotin with her and drove off. He says You can come in with 
somebody; they'll be glad to give you a lift. I'll have to take your mother on 
and I thought about saying, Yes you ought to brought two bottlesinstead of 
just one only I thought about where we were, so I let them go on. Littlethey cared how wet I got, because then Mother could have a whale ofa timebeing afraid I was taking pneumonia.

 Well, I got to thinking about that and watching them throwing dirt into 
it, slapping it on anyway like theywere making mortar or somethingor 
building a fence, and I began to feel sort of funnyand so I decided to walkarounda while. I thought thatif Iwent toward town they'd catch up and be 
trying to make me get in one of them, so I went on back toward the nigger 
graveyard. I got under some cedars, where the rain didn't come much, only 
dripping nowand then, where I could see when they got throughand went 
away. After a while they were all gone and I waited a minute and came out.

 I had to follow the path to keep out of the wet grass so I didn't see her 
until I was pretty near there, standing there in a black cloak, lookingat the 
flowers. I knew who it was right off, before she turned and looked atme 
and lifted upher veil.

 "Hello, Jason," she says, holding out her hand. We shook hands.

 "What are you doing here?" I says. "I thoughtyou promised her you 
wouldn't come back here. I thought you had more sense than that."

 "Yes?" she says. She looked at the flowers again. There must have been 
fifty dollars'worth. Somebody had put one bunch on Quentin's. "You did?" 
she says.

 "I'm not surprised though," I says. "I wouldn't put anything past you. 


You dont mind anybody. You dont give a dam about anybody."

 "Oh," she says,"thatjob."She looked at the grave. "I'm sorry about that, 
Jason."

 "I bet youare," I says. "You'll talk mightymeek now. But you needn't 
have come back. There's not anything left. Ask Uncle Maury, if you dont 
believe me."

 "I dont wantanything," she says. She lookedat the grave. "Why didn't 
they let me know?" she says."I just happened to see it in the paper.On the 
back page.Just happened to."

 I didn't say anything. We stood there, looking at the grave, and then I 
got to thinking about when we were little and one thing and another and I 
got to feeling funnyagain, kind of mad or something, thinkingaboutnow 
we'd have Uncle Maury around the house all the time, running things like 
the way he left me to come home in the rain bymyself. I says,

 "A fine lot you care, sneakingin here soon ashe's dead. But it wont do 
you any good. Dont think that youcan take advantage of this to come 
sneakingback. If you cant stay on the horse you've got, you'll have towalk," 
I says. "We dont even know your name at thathouse," I says. "Do you know 
that? We dont even know yourname. You'd be better off if you were down 
there with him and Quentin," Isays. "Do you know that?"

 "I know it," she says. "Jason," she says, lookingat the grave, "if you'll fixit so I can see her a minute I'll give you fifty dollars."

 "You haven't got fifty dollars," I says.

 "Will you?" she says, not looking at me.

 "Let's see it," I says."I dont believe you've got fifty dollars."

 I could see where her hands were moving under her cloak, then she 
held her hand out. Dam ifit wasn't full of money. I could see two or three 
yellow ones.

 "Does he still give you money?" I says. "How much does he send you?"

 "I'll give you a hundred," she says. "Will you?"

 "Justa minute," I says. "Andjust like I say. I wouldn't have her know itfor a thousand dollars"

 "Yes," she says. "Just like you say do it. Just so I see her a minute. I 
wont beg or do anything. I'll go right on away."

 "Give me the money," I says. 


 "I'll give it to you afterward," she says.

 "dont you trust me?" Isays.

 "No," she says. "I know you. I grew up with you."

 "You're a fine one to talkabouttrusting people," I says."Well," I says. "I 
got to get on out of the rain.Goodbye." I made to go away.

 "Jason,"she says. I stopped.

 "Yes?" I says. "Hurryup. I'm getting wet."

 "All right," she says."Here." There wasn't anybody in sight. I went back 
and took the money. She still held to it. "You'll do it?" she says, looking at 
me from under the veil. "You promise?"

 "Let go," I says."You want somebody to come alongand see us?"

 She let go. I put the money in my pocket. "You'll do it, Jason?"she says. 
"I wouldn't ask you, if there was any other way."

 "You dam right there's no other way," I says. "Sure I'll do it. I said I 
would, didn't I? Onlyyou'll have to do just like I say,now."

 "Yes," she says. "I will." So I told her where to be, and went to the livery 
stable. I hurried and got there justas they were unhitching the hack.I 
asked if they had paid for it yetand he said No and I said Mrs Compson 
forgot something and wanted it again, so they let me take it. Mink was 
driving. Iboughthim a cigar, so we drove around until itbegun to get dark 
on the back streets where they wouldn't see him. Then Mink said he'd have 
to take the team on backand so I said I'd buy him another cigar and so we 
drove into the lane and I went across the yard to the house. I stopped in the 
hall until I could hear Mother and Uncle Maury upstairs, then I wenton 
back to the kitchen.She andBen were there with Dilsey. I said Mother 
wanted her and I took her into the house. I foundUncle Maury's raincoat 
and putit around her and picked her up and went back to the lane and got 
in the hack. I told Mink to drive to the depot. He was afraid to pass the 
stable, so we had to go the back way and I saw her standing on the corner 
under the light and I told Mink todrive close to the walk and when IsaidGo on, to give the team abat. Then I took the raincoat off ofher and held 
her to the window and Caddy sawher and sort of jumped forward.

 "Hit 'em, Mink!" I says, and Mink gave them a cut and we went past her 
like a fire engine."Now get on that train like you promised," I says. Icouldsee her running after us through the back window. "Hit 'em again," I says. 


"Let's get on home." When we turned the corner she was still running.

 And so I counted the money again thatnightand putit away, and I 
didn't feel so bad. I says I reckon that'll show you. I reckon you'll know now 
that you cantbeat me out of ajoband get away with it. Itnever occurred to 
me she wouldn't keep her promise and take that train. But I didn't know 
much about them then; I didn't have any more sense than tobelieve what 
they said,because the next morning dam if she didn't walk right intothe 
store, only she had sense enough to wear the veil and not speak to 
anybody. It wasSaturday morning, because I was at the store, and she 
came right on back to the desk where I was, walking fast.

 "Liar," she says."Liar."

 "Are you crazy?" I says. "Whatdo you mean? coming in here like this?" 
She started in,but I shut her off. Isays,"Youalready cost me one job; do 
you want me to lose this one too? If you've got anything to say to me,I'llmeet you somewhere after dark. What have you got to say tome?" I says.
"Didn't I do everything I said? I said see her a minute, didn't I? Well, didn't 
you?" She juststood there lookingat me, shaking like an ague-fit, her 
hands clenched and kind of jerking. "I did just what I said I would," I says. 
"You're the one that lied. You promised to take that train. Didn't you? 
Didn't you promise? If you thinkyou can get that money back, just try it," I 
says."If it'd been a thousand dollars, you'd still owe me after the riskI 
took. And if I see or hear you're still in town after number 17 runs," I says, 
"I'll tell Mother and Uncle Maury.Then hold your breathuntil you see her 
again." Shejust stood there, looking at me, twisting her hands together.

 "Damn you," she says. "Damn you."

 "Sure," I says."That's all right too. Mind what Isay,now. After number 
17, and I tell them."

 After she was gone I felt better. I says I reckon you'll think twice before 
you deprive me of a job that was promised me. I was a kid then. I believed 
folks when they said they'd do things. I've learned better since. Besides, 
like I say I guess I dontneed anyman's help to get along I can stand on my 
own feet like I always have. Then all of a sudden I thought of Dilsey and 
Uncle Maury. I thought how she'd get around Dilsey and that Uncle Maury 
would do anythingfor ten dollars.And there I was, couldn't even get awayfrom the store to protect my own Mother. Like she says,if one of you had 


to be taken, thankGod it was you left me I can depend on you and I says 
well I dont reckon I'll ever get far enough from the store to get out ofyour 
reach. Somebody's got to hold on to what little we have left, I reckon.

 So as soon as I got home I fixed Dilsey. I told Dilsey she had leprosy and 
I got the bible and read where a man's flesh rotted off and I told her that ifshe ever looked at her or Ben or Quentin they'd catch it too.So I thought I 
had everything all fixed until thatday when I came home and foundBen 
bellowing.Raising hell andnobody could quiet him. Mother said, Well, get 
him the slipper then. Dilsey made out she didn't hear. Mother said itagainand I says I'd go I couldn't stand that dam noise. Like I say I can stand lots 
of things I dont expect muchfrom them but if I have to work all day long ina dam store dam if I dont think I deserve a little peace and quiet to eat 
dinner in. So I says I'd go and Dilsey says quick, "Jason!"

 Well, like a flash I knew what was up,butjust to make sure I went and 
got the slipper and brought itback, and just like I thought, when he saw it 
you'd thought we were killing him. So I made Dilsey own up, then I toldMother. We had to take her up to bed then, and after things got quieted 
down a little I put the fear ofGod into Dilsey. As much as you can into a 
nigger, thatis. That's the trouble with nigger servants, when they've been 
with youfor a long time they get so full of selfimportance that they're not 
worth a dam. Think they run the whole family.

 "I like to know whut's de hurt in lettin dat po chile see her own baby," 
Dilsey says. "IfMr Jason was stillhere hit ud be different."

 "Only Mr Jason's not here," I says. "Iknow you wont pay me anymind, 
but I reckon you'll do what Mother says. You keep on worryingher like this 
until you get her into the graveyard too, then you can fill the whole house 
full of ragtag and bobtail. But what did you want to let that dam boy see her 
for?"

 "You's a cold man, Jason,if man youis," she says. "I thank de Lawd I 
got mo heart den cat, even ef hitisblack."

 "At least I'm man enough to keep that flour barrel full," I says."And ifyou do that again, you wontbe eating out of it either."

 So the next time I told her thatif she tried Dilsey again, Mother was 
going to fire Dilsey and send Ben to Jackson and take Quentin and go 
away. She looked at me for a while. There wasn't any street light close and I 


couldn't see her face much. But I could feel her looking atme. When we 
were little when she'd get mad and couldn't do anythingaboutit her upper 
lip would begin to jump.Everytime it jumped it would leave a little more of 
her teeth showing, and all the time she'd be as still asa post, nota muscle 
moving except her lip jerking higher and higher up her teeth. But she 
didn't say anything.She just said,

 "All right. How much?"

 "Well, if one look through a hack window was worth a hundred," I says. 
So after that she behaved pretty well, only one time she asked to see a 
statement of the bank account.

 "I know they have Mother's indorsement on them," she says. "ButIwant to see the bank statement. Iwant to see myself where those checksgo."

 "That's in Mother's private business," I says."If you thinkyou have any 
right to pry into her private affairsI'll tell her you believe those checks are 
being misappropriated and you want an audit because you dont trust her."

 She didn't say anything or move. I could hear her whispering Damn you 
oh damn you oh damn you.

 "Sayit out," I says. "I dont reckon it's any secret what youand I think of 
one another. Maybe you want the moneyback," I says.

 "Listen, Jason," she says."dontlie to me now. About her. I wontask to 
see anything. If that isn't enough, I'll send more each month. Just promise 
that she'll--that she--You can do that. Things for her. Be kind to her. Littlethings that I cant, they wont let....But you wont. Younever had a drop of 
warm blood in you. Listen," she says. "If you'll get Mother to let me have 
her back, I'll give you a thousand dollars."

 "You haven't got a thousand dollars," I says. "I know you're lyingnow."

 "Yes I have. I will have. I can get it."

 "And I know how you'll get it," I says. "You'll get it the same way you got 
her. And when she gets big enough--" Then I thought she really was goingto hit at me, and then I didn't know what she was going to do. She acted for 
a minute like some kind of a toy that's woundup too tightand aboutto 
burstall to pieces.

 "Oh, I'm crazy," she says. "I'm insane. I cant take her. Keep her. What 
am I thinking of. Jason," she says,grabbing my arm.Her hands were hot 


as fever. "You'll have to promise to take care of her, to-- She's kin to you; 
your own fleshandblood. Promise, Jason. Youhave Father's name: do you 
think I'd have to ask him twice? once, even?"

 "That's so," I says. "He did leave me something. What do you want me 
to do," I says."Buy an apron anda gocart? I never got you into this,"I says. 
"I run more risk than you do, because youhaven't got anythingat stake. So 
if you expect--"

 "No," she says, then she begun to laughand to try to hold it backall at 
the same time."No. I have nothing at stake," she says, making thatnoise, 
putting her hands to her mouth."Nuh-nuh-nothing," she says.

 "Here," I says. "Stop that!"

 "I'm tr-trying to," she says, holding her hands over her mouth. "Oh God, 
oh God."

 "I'm goingaway from here," I says. "I cantbe seen here. You get on out 
of town now, you hear?"

 "Wait," she says, catching my arm. "I've stopped. I wont again. You 
promise, Jason?" she says, and me feeling her eyes almost like they were 
touching my face. "You promise? Mother--that--money ifsometimes she 
needs things-- If I send checks forher to you, other ones besides those, 
you'll give them to her? You wont tell? You'll see that she has things like 
other girls?"

 "Sure," I says."As long asyoubehave and do like I tell you."

 And so when Earl came up front with his hat on he says,"I'm going to 
step up to Rogers' and get a snack. We wont have time to go home to 
dinner, I reckon."

 "What's the matter we wont have time?" I says.

 "With this show in town and all," he says."They're going to give an 
afternoon performance too, and they'll all want to get done tradingin time 
to go to it. So we'd better just run up to Rogers'."

 "All right," I says."It's your stomach. If you want to make a slave of 
yourself to your business, it'sall right with me."

 "I reckon you'll never be a slave to anybusiness,"he says.

 "Not unlessit's Jason Compson's business," I says.

 So when I went back and opened it the only thing that surprisedme was 
it was a money order not a check. Yes, sir. You cant trust a one of them. 


After all the risk I'd taken, riskingMother finding out abouther coming 
down here once or twice a year sometimes, and me having to tell Mother 
lies about it. That's gratitude for you. And I wouldn't putit past her to try 
to notify the postoffice not to let anyone except her cash it.Givingakid like 
that fifty dollars. Why I never sawfifty dollarsuntil I was twentyone years 
old, with all the other boys with the afternoon off and all daySaturday and 
me working in astore. Like I say,how can they expect anybody to controlher, with her giving her money behind our backs. She has the same home 
you had I says, and the same raising. I reckon Mother isa better judge of 
what she needs than you are, thathaven't even got a home."If you want to 
give her money," I says,"you sendit to Mother, dont be giving it to her. If 
I've got to run this risk every few months,you'll have to do like I say, or it'sout."

 And justabout the time I got ready to begin on it because if Earlthought I was going to dashup the street and gobble twobits worth of 
indigestion on his account he wasbad fooled. I maynotbe sitting with my 
feet on a mahogany desk but I am being payed for what I do inside thisbuilding and if I cant manage to live a civilised life outside ofit I'll gowhere I can. I can stand on my own feet; I dont need any man's mahoganydesk to prop me up. So just about the time I got ready to start I'd have to 
drop everything and run to sell some redneck a dime's worth of nails or 
something, and Earl up there gobbling asandwich and half wayback 
already, like asnot, and then I found that all the blanks were gone. I 
remembered then that I had aimed to get some more, but it was too late 
now, and then I looked up and there she came. In the back door. I heard 
her asking old Jobif I was there. I justhad time to stick them in the drawer 
and close it.

 She came around to the desk. I looked at my watch.

 "You been to dinner already?" I says. "It'sjust twelve; I just heardit 
strike. You must have flown home and back."

 "I'm not going home to dinner," she says. "Did I get a letter today?"

 "Were you expecting one?" I says. "Have you got a sweetie that can 
write?"

 "From Mother," she says. "Did I get a letter from Mother?" she says, 
looking at me. 


 "Mother got one from her," I says. "I haven't opened it. You'll have to 
wait until she opens it.She'll let you see it, I imagine."

 "Please, Jason," she says, not paying any attention. "Did I get one?"

 "What's the matter?" I says."I never knew you tobe thisanxiousabout 
anybody. You must expect some money from her."

 "She said she--" she says."Please, Jason," she says."Did I?"

 "You must have been to schooltoday, after all," I says."Somewhere 
where they taught you tosay please. Wait a minute, while I wait on that 
customer."

 I went and waited on him. When I turned to come back she was out of 
sightbehind the desk. I ran. I ran around the desk and caught her as she 
jerked her hand out of the drawer. I took the letter away from her, beating 
her knuckles on the desk until she let go.

 "You would, would you?" I says.

 "Give it to me," she says. "You've already opened it. Give it to me. 
Please, Jason. It's mine. I saw the name."

 "I'll take a hame string to you,"I says. "That's what I'll give you. Goinginto my papers."

 "Is there some money in it?" she says, reaching for it."She said she 
would send me some money. She promised she would. Give it to me."

 "What do you want withmoney?" I says.

 "She said she would," she says."Give it to me. Please,Jason. I wont ever 
ask you anythingagain,if you'll give it to me this time."

 "I'm going to,if you'll give me time," I says. I took the letter and the 
money order out and gave her the letter. She reached for the money order,
not hardly glancing at the letter. "You'll have to sign it first," I says.

 "How much is it?" she says.

 "Read the letter," I says. "I reckon it'll say."

 She read it fast, in about two looks.

 "It dont say," she says, lookingup. She dropped the letter to the floor. 
"How much is it?"

 "It's ten dollars," I says.

 "Ten dollars?" she says, staring at me.

 "And you ought tobe dam gladto get that," I says. "A kid like you.What 
are you in such a rushfor moneyall of a sudden for?" 


 "Ten dollars?" she says, like she was talking in her sleep. "Just ten 
dollars?" She made a grabat the money order. "You're lying," she says. 
"Thief!" she says. "Thief!"

 "You would, would you?" I says, holding her off.

 "Give it to me!" she says. "It'smine.She sentit to me. I will see it. I 
will."

 "You will?" I says,holdingher. "How're you going to do it?"

 "Just let me see it,Jason,"she says."Please. I wontask you for anything 
again."

 "Think I'm lying, do you?" I says. "Just for that you wont see it."

 "Butjust ten dollars," she says."She told me she--she told me--Jason, 
please please please. I've got to have some money. I've just got to.Give it to 
me, Jason. I'll do anythingif you will."

 "Tell me what you've got to have money for," I says.

 "I've got to have it," she says. She was looking at me. Then all of a 
sudden she quit looking at me without moving her eyes at all. I knew she 
was going to lie. "It's some moneyI owe," she says."I've got to pay it. I've 
got to pay it today."

 "Who to?" I says. Her hands were sort of twisting. I could watch her 
trying to think of a lie to tell. "Have you been charging things at stores 
again?" I says. "You needn't bother to tell me that. If you can find anybody 
in this town that'll charge anything to you after what I told them, I'll eat it."

 "It's a girl," she says. "It's a girl. I borrowed some money from a girl.
I've got to pay it back.Jason, give it to me. Please. I'll do anything. I've got 
to have it. Mother will pay you. I'll write to her to pay you and that Iwont 
ever ask her for anything again. You can see the letter. Please, Jason.I've 
got to have it."

 "Tell me what you want with it, and I'll see about it," I says."Tell me." 
She just stood there, with her hands working against her dress. "Allright," 
I says. "If ten dollars is too little for you, I'll just take it home to Mother, 
and you know what'll happen to itthen. Of course, if you're so rich you 
dont need ten dollars--"

 She stood there, looking at the floor, kind ofmumbling to herself. "She 
said she would send me some money. She said she sends money here and 
you say she dont send any.She said she's sent a lot of money here. She says 


it's for me. That it's for me to have some of it. And yousay we haven't got 
any money."

 "You know as much about thatasI do," I says. "You've seen what 
happens to those checks."

 "Yes," she says, looking at the floor. "Ten dollars," she says."Ten 
dollars."

 "And you'd better thank your stars it's ten dollars," I says."Here,"Isays. I put the money order face down on the desk, holding myhand on it. 
"Sign it."

 "Will you let me see it?" she says. "I just want to look atit. Whatever itsays, I wontaskfor but ten dollars. You can have the rest. I just wantto see 
it."

 "Not after the way you've acted," I says."You've got to learn one thing, 
and thatis that when I tell you to do something,you've got it to do.You
sign your name on that line."

 She took the pen, but instead of signing it she just stood there with her 
head bent and the pen shaking in her hand. Just like her mother. "Oh, 
God," she says,"oh, God."

 "Yes," I says. "That's one thingyou'll have to learn if you never learn 
anything else. Sign itnow, and get on out of here."

 She signed it."Where's the money?" she says. I took the order and 
blotted it and put it in my pocket.Then I gave her the ten dollars.

 "Now you go on back toschool this afternoon, you hear?" I says. She 
didn't answer. She crumpled the bill up in her hand like it was a rag or 
something andwent on out the front door justas Earl came in.A customer 
came in with him and they stopped up front. I gathered up the things and 
put on my hat and wentup front.

 "Been much busy?" Earl says.

 "Not much," I says.He looked out the door.

 "That your car over yonder?" he says. "Better not try to go out home to 
dinner. We'll likely have another rushjustbefore the show opens.Get you a 
lunch atRogers' and puta ticket in the drawer."

 "Much obliged," I says. "I can still manage to feed myself, I reckon." 
And right there he'd stay, watching that door like a hawk until I came 
through itagain. Well, he'd just have to watch it for a while; I was doing the 


best I could. The time before I says that's the last one now; you'll have to 
remember to get some more right away. But who can remember anythingin all this hurrah. And now this dam show had to come here the one day I'dhave to hunt all over town for ablank check, besides all the other things I 
had to do to keep the house running, and Earl watching the door like a 
hawk.

 I went to the printing shop and told him I wanted to play ajoke on a 
fellow, but he didn't have anything. Then he told me to have a look in the 
old opera house, where somebody had stored a lot of papersand junk out 
of the old Merchants' and Farmers' Bank when it failed, so I dodged up a 
few more alleys so Earl couldn't see me and finally found old man 
Simmons and got the keyfrom him and wentup there and dug around. At 
last I found a pad on aSaint Louisbank. And of course she'd pick this one 
time to look atit close. Well, it would have to do. I couldn't waste any more 
time now.

 I went back to the store. "Forgot some papers Mother wants to goto the 
bank," I says. I went back to the desk and fixed the check. Trying to hurry 
and all, I says to myselfit's a goodthing her eyes are giving out, withthat 
little whore in the house, a Christian forbearing woman like Mother. I says 
you know just as well as I do what she's going to grow upintobut I says 
that's yourbusiness, ifyou want to keep her and raise her in your house 
justbecause of Father. Then she would begin to cry and say it was her own 
flesh andblood so I just says All right. Have it your way. I can stand it if 
you can.

 I fixed the letter up again and glued it back and went out.

 "Try not to be gone any longer than you can help," Earl says.

 "All right," I says. I went to the telegraph office. The smart boys were allthere.

 "Any ofyouboysmade your million yet?" I says.

 "Who can do anything, with amarket like that?" Doc says.

 "What's it doing?" I says. I went in and looked. It was three points 
under the opening. "Youboys are not going to let a little thing like the 
cotton market beat you,are you?"I says. "I thought you were too smart for 
that."

 "Smart, hell," Doc says."It wasdown twelve points at twelve oclock. 


Cleaned me out."

 "Twelve points?" I says. "Why the hell didn't somebody let me know? 
Why didn't you let me know?" I says to the operator.

 "I take it asit comes in,"he says. "I'm not running abucket shop."

 "You're smart, aren't you?" I says. "Seems to me, with the moneyI 
spend with you, you could take time to call me up. Or maybe your dam 
company's in a conspiracy with those dam eastern sharks."

 He didn't say anything.He made like he was busy.

 "You're getting a little toobigfor your pants," I says. "First thingyou 
know you'll be working for a living."

 "What's the matter with you?"Doc says. "You're still three pointsto the 
good."

 "Yes," I says. "If I happened tobe selling. I haven't mentioned that yet, I 
think. Youboysall cleaned out?"

 "I got caught twice," Doc says."I switched justin time."

 "Well," I. O. Snopes says. "I've picked hit; I reckon taintno more than 
fair fer hit to pick me once in a while."

 So I left them buying and selling among themselves at anickel a point. I 
found a nigger and sent him for my car and stood on the corner and 
waited. I couldn't see Earl lookingup and down the street, with one eye on 
the clock, because I couldn't see the door from here. After about a week he 
got back with it.

 "Where the hell have you been?" I says."Riding around where the 
wenches could see you?"

 "I come straight as I could," he says."I had to drive clean around the 
square, wid all dem wagons."

 I never found a nigger yet thatdidn't have an airtight alibifor whatever 
he did. But just turn one loose in a car and he's bound to show off. I got inand went on around the square. I caughta glimpse of Earl in the door 
across the square.

 I went straight to the kitchen and told Dilsey to hurry up with dinner.

 "Quentin aint come yit," she says.

 "What of that?" I says."You'll be telling me next that Luster's notquite 
ready to eat yet. Quentin knows when meals are served in this house. 
Hurry up with it,now." 


 Mother was in her room. I gave her the letter. She opened it and took 
the check out and satholdingit in her hand. I went and got the shovel from 
the corner and gave her a match. "Come on," I says."Get it over with. You'llbe cryingin aminute."

 She took the match,but she didn't strike it.She sat there, lookingat the 
check. Just like I saidit would be.

 "I hate to do it," she says."To increase your burden by adding 
Quentin...."

 "I guess we'll get along," I says."Come on. Get it over with."

 But she just sat there, holding the check.

 "This one is on a differentbank," she says. "They have been on an 
Indianapolis bank."

 "Yes," I says. "Women are allowed to do that too."

 "Do what?" she says.

 "Keep moneyin two different banks," I says.

 "Oh," she says.She looked at the check a while. "I'm glad toknowshe's 
so ... she has somuch....God sees that I am doing right," she says.

 "Come on," I says. "Finish it.Get the fun over."

 "Fun?" she says."When I think--"

 "I thought you were burning this two hundred dollars a month for fun," 
I says. "Come on,now. Want me to strike the match?"

 "I could bring myself toaccept them," she says. "For my children's sake. 
I have no pride."

 "You'd never be satisfied," I says. "Youknow you wouldn't. You've 
settled that once, let it stay settled. We can get along."

 "I leave everything to you," she says."But sometimes I become afraidthat in doing this Iam depriving you all of what is rightfully yours.Perhaps 
I shall be punished for it. If you want me to, I will smother my pride and 
accept them."

 "What would be the good in beginning now, when you've been 
destroying them for fifteen years?" I says. "If you keep on doing it, you 
have lost nothing,but if you'd begin to take them now, you'll have lost fifty 
thousand dollars.We've got alongso far, haven't we?" I says."I haven't 
seen youin the poorhouse yet."

 "Yes," she says. "We Bascombsneed nobody's charity. Certainly not that 


of a fallen woman."

 She struck the match and lit the check and put it in the shovel, and then 
the envelope, and watched them burn.

 "You dont know whatit is," she says. "Thank God you willnever know 
what a mother feels."

 "There are lots of women in this world no better than her," I says.

 "But theyare not my daughters," she says. "It'snot myself," she says. 
"I'd gladly take her back, sins and all, because she is my flesh and blood. 
It's for Quentin's sake."

 Well, I could have said it wasn't much chance of anybody hurtingQuentin much,but like I say I dont expect much but I do want to eatand 
sleep without a couple of women squabblingand crying in the house.

 "And yours," she says."I know how you feel toward her."

 "Let her come back," I says, "far as I'm concerned."

 "No," she says. "I owe that to your father's memory."

 "When he was trying all the time to persuade you to let her come home 
when Herbert threw her out?" I says.

 "You dontunderstand," she says. "I know you dont intend to make it 
more difficultfor me. Butit's my place to suffer for my children," she says. 
"I can bear it."

 "Seems to me you go to a lot ofunnecessary trouble doingit," I says. 
The paper burned out. I carried it to the grate and put itin."It just seems a 
shame to me to burn up good money," I says.

 "Let me never see the day when my children will have to accept that, the 
wages of sin,"she says."I'd rather see even you dead in your coffin first."

 "Have it your way," I says. "Are we going to have dinner soon?" I says. 
"Because if we're not, I'll have to go on back. We're pretty busy today." She 
got up. "I've told her once," I says."It seems she's waiting on Quentin or 
Luster or somebody. Here, I'll call her. Wait." But she went to the head of 
the stairs and called.

 "Quentin aint come yit," Dilsey says.

 "Well, I'll have to get on back,"I says. "I can get a sandwich downtown. 
I dont want tointerfere with Dilsey's arrangements," I says. Well, that got 
her started again, with Dilsey hobbling and mumblingbackand forth, 
saying, 


 "All right, all right, Ise puttin hit on fastas I kin."

 "I try to please you all,"Mother says. "I try to make thingsas easyfor 
you as I can."

 "I'm not complaining,am I?" Isays."Have I said a word except I had to 
go back to work?"

 "I know,"she says. "I know you haven't had the chance the others had, 
that you've had tobury yourself in a little country store. I wanted youto get 
ahead. I knew your father wouldnever realise that you were the only one 
who had any business sense, and then when everything else failed I 
believed that when she married, and Herbert ... after his promise--"

 "Well, he was probably lying too," I says. "He maynot have even had a 
bank. And if he had, I dont reckon he'd have to come all the way to 
Mississippi to get a man for it."

 We ate a while. I could hear Ben in the kitchen, where Luster was 
feeding him. Like I say, if we've got to feed another mouthand she wonttake that money, whynot send him down to Jackson.He'll be happierthere, with people like him. I saysGod knows there's little enough room for 
pride in thisfamily,butit dont take much pride to not like to see a thirty 
year old man playingaround the yard with a nigger boy, running upand 
down the fence and lowing like a cow whenever they play golf over there. I 
says if they'd sent him to Jackson at first we'd all be better off today.I says, 
you've done your dutyby him; you've done all anybody can expect ofyou 
and more than most folks would do, so why not send him there and get 
that muchbenefit out of the taxeswe pay. Then she says,"I'll be gone soon. 
I know I'm just aburden to you" and I says"You've been saying thatso 
long that I'm beginning tobelieve you" only I says you'd better be sure and 
not let me know you're gone because I'll sure have him on number 
seventeen that nightand I says I think I knowa place where they'll take her 
too and the name of it'snot Milk street and Honeyavenue either. Then she 
begun to cry and I says All rightall right I have as much pride aboutmy 
kinfolksas anybody even if I dont always know where they come from.

 We ate for a while. Mother sent Dilsey to the front to lookfor Quentin 
again.

 "I keep telling you she's not coming to dinner," I says.

 "She knows better than that,"Mother says. "She knows I dont permit 


her to run about the streets and not come home at meal time. Did you look 

good, Dilsey?"

 "Dont let her, then," I says.

 "What can I do," she says. "You have all of you flouted me. Always."

 "If you wouldn't come interfering, I'd make her mind," I says. "It 
wouldn't take me but about one day to straighten her out."

 "You'd be too brutal with her," she says."You have yourUncle Maury'stemper."

 That reminded me of the letter. I took it outand handed it to her. "You 
wont have to open it," I says. "The bank will let you know how muchit isthis time."

 "It's addressed to you," she says.

 "Go on and open it," I says.She opened it and read it and handed itto 
me.

" 'My dear youngnephew', it says, 

'You will be glad to learn that I am now in a position to avail myself of an 
opportunity regarding which,for reasons which I shall make obvious to 
you, I shall not gointo details until I have an opportunity to divulge it to 
you in a more secure manner. My business experience has taught me to be 
chary of committinganything ofa confidentialnature to anymore concrete 
medium than speech, and my extreme precaution in this instance should 
give you some inkling of its value.Needless to say, I have just completed a 
most exhaustive examination of allits phases,and I feel no hesitancyintelling you thatit is that sort of golden chance that comesbut once in a 
lifetime, and I now see clearly before me that goal toward which I have 
long and unflaggingly striven:i.e.,the ultimate solidification of my affairs 
by which I may restore to its rightful position that family of which I have 
the honor to be the sole remaining male descendant; that family in which I 
have ever included your lady mother and her children. 

'As it so happens, Iam not quitein a position to avail myself of thisopportunity to the uttermost which it warrants,but rather than go out of 
the family to do so, I am today drawingupon your Mother's bankfor the 
small sum necessary to complement my own initial investment,for which I 
herewith enclose, as a matter of formality, mynote of hand at eight 


percent. per annum. Needless to say, thisis merely a formality, to secure 
your Mother in the event of that circumstance of which man is ever the 
plaything and sport. For naturallyI shall employ thissum as thoughit were 
my own and so permit your Mother to avail herself of this opportunity 
which my exhaustive investigation has shown to be abonanza--if you willpermit the vulgarism--of the first water and purest ray serene.

'This is in confidence, you willunderstand, from one business man to 
another; we will harvest our own vineyards, eh? And knowing your 
Mother's delicate health and that timorousness which such delicately 
nurtured Southern ladies would naturally feel regardingmatters of 
business, and their charming proneness to divulge unwittingly such 
matters in conversation, I would suggest that you do notmention it to her 
at all. On second thought, I advise you not to do so. It mightbe better to 
simply restore this sum to the bank at some future date, say, in a lump sum 
with the other small sums for which I am indebted to her, and saynothingabout itat all. It is our duty to shield her from the crass material world as 
much as possible. 

ur affectionate Uncle, 'Maury L. Bascom

 "What do you want to do aboutit?" I says, flipping it across the table.

 "I know you grudge what I give him," she says.

 "It's your money," I says. "If you want to throw it to the birds even, it'syour business."

 "He's my own brother," Mother says. "He's the last Bascomb. When we 
are gone there wont be any more of them."

 "That'll be hard on somebody, I guess," I says."All right,all right,"I 
says."It's your money. Do asyou please with it. You wantme to tell the 
bank to payit?"

 "I know you begrudge him," she says. "I realise the burden on your 
shoulders. When I'm gone it will be easier on you."

 "I could make it easier right now," I says."All right,all right, I wont 
mention itagain. Move allbedlam in here if you want to."

 "He's your own brother," she says. "Even if he is afflicted."

 "I'll take your bankbook," I says. "I'll draw my check today." 


 "He kept you waiting six days,"she says."Are you sure the business issound? It seems strange to me that a solvent business cannot payits 
employees promptly."

 "He's all right," I says."Safe as a bank. I tell him not tobother about 
mine until we get done collecting every month. That's why it's late 
sometimes."

 "I just couldn't bear to have you lose the little I had to invest for you," 
she says."I've often thought thatEarl is nota good business man. Iknow 
he doesn't take youinto his confidence to the extent that your investment 
in the business should warrant. I'm going tospeak to him."

 "No, you let him alone," I says."It's hisbusiness."

 "You have a thousand dollars in it."

 "You let him alone," I says. "I'm watching things. I have your power of 
attorney. It'll be all right."

 "You dont know whata comfort you are to me," she says."Youhave 
alwaysbeen my pride and joy,butwhen you came to me of your own 
accord and insisted on banking your salary each monthin my name,I 
thanked God it was you left me if they had to be taken."

 "They were all right," I says."They did the best they could, I reckon."

 "When you talk that way I know you are thinkingbitterly of your 
father's memory," she says."You have a right to, I suppose. Butit breaks 
my heart to hear you."

 I got up. "If you've got any crying to do," I says, "you'll have to doit 
alone, because I've got to get on back. I'll get the bankbook."

 "I'll get it," she says.

 "Keep still," I says."I'll get it." I went up stairs and got the bankbookout of her desk and wentback to town. I went to the bankand deposited 
the check and the money order and the other ten, and stopped at the 
telegraph office. It was one point above the opening. I had already lost 
thirteen points, allbecause she had to come helling in there at twelve, 
worrying me about that letter.

 "What time did that report come in?" Isays.

 "About an hour ago," he says.

 "An hour ago?" I says. "What are we paying youfor?" I says."Weeklyreports? How do you expect a man to do anything? The whole dam top 


could blow offand we'd not knowit."

 "I dont expect you to do anything," he says."They changed that law 
making folks play the cotton market."

 "They have?" I says. "I hadn't heard. They must have sent the news outover the Western Union."

 I went back to the store. Thirteen points. Dam if Ibelieve anybody 
knows anything about the dam thing except the ones that sit back in those 
New York offices and watch the country suckers come up and beg them totake their money. Well, aman thatjust callsshows he hasno faithinhimself,and like I say if you aren'tgoing to take the advice, what's the use 
in payingmoney for it. Besides, these people are right up there on the 
ground; they know everything that's going on. I could feel the telegram inmy pocket. I'd just have to prove that they were using the telegraph 
company to defraud. That would constitute abucket shop. And I wouldn't 
hesitate that long, either. Only be damned ifit doesn't look like a company 
as big and rich as the Western Union could get a market report out on 
time. Half as quick as they'll get a wire to you saying Your account closed 
out. But what the hell do they care about the people. They're hand in glove 
with that New York crowd. Anybody could see that.

 When I came in Earl looked athis watch. But he didn't say anythinguntil the customer was gone. Then he says,

 "You go home todinner?"

 "I had to go to the dentist," I says because it's notany of his business 
where I eat but I've got to be in the store with him all the afternoon. And 
with hisjaw running offafter all I've stood. You take a little two by four 
country storekeeper like I say it takes a man withjust five hundred dollars 
to worry aboutit fifty thousand dollars' worth.

 "You might have told me," he says. "I expected youback right away."

 "I'll trade you this tooth and give you ten dollars to boot,any time," I 
says."Our agreement was an hour for dinner," I says,"and if you dont like 
the way I do, you know what you can do aboutit."

 "I've known that some time," he says. "If it hadn't been for yourmother 
I'd have done it before now, too. She's a lady I've got a lot of sympathy for, 
Jason. Too bad some other folks Iknow cant sayas much."

 "Then you can keep it," I says. "When we need any sympathy I'll let you 


know in plenty of time."

 "I've protected you about thatbusiness a long time, Jason," he says.

 "Yes?" I says, lettinghim go on. Listening to what he would saybefore I 
shut him up.

 "I believe I know more about where that automobile came from than 
she does."

 "You think so, do you?" I says."When are you going to spread the news 
that I stole it from mymother?"

 "I dont say anything," he says."I know you have her power of attorney. 
And I know she still believes that thousand dollars isin thisbusiness."

 "All right," I says."Since you knowso much, I'll tell you a little more: go 
to the bank and ask them whose account I've been depositinga hundred 
and sixty dollars on the first of every month for twelve years."

 "I dont say anything," he says."I just ask you to be a little more carefulafter this."

 I never said anythingmore. It doesn't do any good. I've found that when 
a man gets into a rut the best thing you can do is let him stay there. And 
when a man gets itin his head that he's got to tell something on youfor 
your own good, goodnight. I'm glad I haven't got the sort of conscience I've 
got to nurse like a sick puppy all the time. If I'd ever be as careful over 
anything as he is to keep his little shirt tail full ofbusiness from makinghim more than eight percent. I reckon he thinks they'd get him on the 
usury law if he netted more than eight percent. What the hell chance has a 
man got, tied down in a town like this and to a business like this. Why I 
could take hisbusiness in one year and fix him so he'd never have to work 
again, only he'd give it all away to the church or something. If there's one 
thing getsunder my skin, it's a dam hypocrite. A man that thinks anything 
he dont understand all about must be crooked and that first chance he gets 
he's morally bound to tell the third party what's none of hisbusiness to tell.
Like I say if I thought every time aman did something I didn't know allabout he wasbound to be a crook,I reckon I wouldn't have any troublefinding something back there on those books that you wouldn't see any use 
for running and telling somebodyI thought ought to know aboutit,when 
for all I knew they might know a dam sight more about itnow than Idid, 
and if they didn't it was dam little of my businessanyway and he says, "My 


booksare open to anybody. Anybody that has any claim or believes she has 
any claim on thisbusiness can goback there and welcome."

 "Sure, you wont tell," I says."You couldn't square your conscience with 
that. You'll just take her back there and let her find it. You wont tell,
yourself."

 "I'm not trying to meddle in your business," he says. "I know you 
missed out on some things like Quentin had. But your mother has had a 
misfortunate life too, and if she was to come in here and ask me whyyou 
quit, I'd have to tell her. It aint that thousand dollars. Youknow that. It'sbecause a man never gets anywhere if fact and his ledgers dont square. And 
I'm not going to lie to anybody, for myself or anybody else."

 "Well, then," I says. "I reckon that conscience of yoursis a more 
valuable clerk than I am; it dont have to go home at noon to eat. Only dont 
let it interfere with my appetite," Isays,because how the hell can I do 
anything right, with that dam family and her not making any effort to 
control her nor any of them like that time when she happened to see one of 
them kissingCaddy and all next day she went around the house in ablack 
dress and a veil and even Father couldn't get her to say a word except 
crying and saying her little daughter was dead and Caddy about fifteen 
then onlyin three years she'd been wearing haircloth or probablysandpaper at that rate. Do you think I can afford to have her running about 
the streets with every drummer that comes to town, I says, and them 
telling the new onesup and down the toad where to pick up a hot one when 
they made Jefferson. I haven't gotmuch pride, I cant afford it witha 
kitchen full ofniggers to feed androbbing the state asylum ofits star 
freshman. Blood, I says, governors and generals. It's a dam good thingwe 
never had any kings and presidents; we'd all be down there at Jackson 
chasing butterflies. I says it'd be bad enoughifit was mine; I'd at least be 
sure it was abastard to begin with, and now even the Lord doesn't know 
that for certain probably.

 So after a while I heard the band start up, and then they begun toclear 
out. Headed for the show, every one of them. Haggling over a twenty cent 
hame string to save fifteen cents, so they can give it toa bunch of Yankees 
that come in and pay maybe ten dollars for the privilege. I went on out to 
the back. 


 "Well," I says."If you dont look out, thatbolt will grow into your hand. 
And then I'm going to take an axe and chop it out. What do you reckon the 
boll-weevils'll eat if you dont get those cultivatorsin shape to raise them a 
crop?" I says, "sage grass?"

 "Dem folks sho do play dem horns," he says. "Tell me man in datshow 
kin play a tune on a handsaw.Pick hit like abanjo."

 "Listen," I says."Do you knowhow much thatshow'll spend in thistown? About ten dollars," I says. "The ten dollars Buck Turpin has in hispocket right now."

 "Whut dey give Mr Buck ten dollars fer?" he says.

 "For the privilege of showinghere," I says. "You can put the balance of 
what they'll spend in your eye."

 "You mean dey pays ten dollarsjest to give dey show here?" he says.

 "That's all," I says. "And how much do you reckon--"

 "Gret day," he says. "You mean to tell me dey chargin um to let um 
show here? I'd pay ten dollars to see dat man pick dat saw, ef I had to. I 
figures dat tomorrow mawnin Ibe still owin um nine dollars and sixbitsat 
dat rate."

 And then a Yankee will talkyour head off aboutniggers getting ahead. 
Get them ahead, what Isay.Get them so far ahead you cant find one south 
of Louisville with ablood hound. Because when I told him about how 
they'd pick up Saturdaynightandcarry off at least a thousand dollars out 
of the county, he says,

 "I dont begridge um. Ikin shoafford my two bits."

 "Two bits hell," I says."That dont beginit. How about the dime or 
fifteen cents you'll spend for a dam two cent box of candy or something. 
How about the time you're wasting right now, listening to thatband."

 "Dat's de troof," he says."Well, ef I lives swell night hit's "wine tobe 
two bits mo dey takin out of town,cat's shot"

 "Then you're a fool," I says.

 "Well," he says."I dont spute dat neither. Ef dat uz a crime, all chain-
gangs wouldn't be black."

 Well, just about that time I happened to look up the alley and saw her. 
When I stepped back and looked at my watch I didn't notice at the time 
who he was because I was lookingat the watch. It was just two thirty, forty



five minutesbefore anybody but me expected her tobe out. So when I 
looked around the door the first thing I saw was the red tie he had on and I 
was thinking what the hell kind ofa man would wear a red tie. But she was 
sneakingalong the alley, watchingthe door, so I wasn't thinking anythingabout him until they had gone past. I was wonderingif she'd have solittlerespect for me that she'd not only play out ofschool when I told her not to, 
but would walk right past the store, daring me not to see her. Only she 
couldn't see into the door because the sun fell straightintoit and it was like 
trying to see throughan automobile searchlight, so I stood there and 
watched her go on past, with her face painted up like a dam clown'sand 
her hair all gummed and twisted and a dress that ifa woman had come out 
doors even on Gayoso or Beale street when I was a young fellow with no 
more than that to cover her legs and behind, she'd been thrown in jail. I'llbe damned if they dont dress like they were trying to make every man they 
passed on the street want to reachout and clap his hand on it. And so I was 
thinking what kind ofa dam man would wear a red tie when all of asudden 
I knew he was one of those show folks well as if she'd told me. Well, I can 
stand a lot;if I couldn't dam if I wouldn't be in a hell ofa fix, so when they 
turned the corner I jumped down and followed. Me, withoutany hat,in the 
middle of the afternoon, having tochase up and down back alleysbecause 
of my mother's good name. Like Isay you cant do anything with a woman 
like that, if she's got it in her. If it'sin her blood, you cant do anything with 
her. The only thing you can do is to get rid of her, let her go on and live 
with her own sort.

 I went on to the street, but they were out of sight. And there I was, 
withoutanyhat, looking like I wascrazy too. Like a man would naturallythink, one of them is crazyand another one drowned himself and the other 
one was turned out into the street by her husband, what's the reason the 
rest of them are not crazy too. All the time I could see them watching me 
like a hawk, waitingfor a chance to say Well I'm not surprised I expected it 
all the time the whole family's crazy. Selling land to send him toHarvard 
and paying taxes to support a state University all the time that I never saw 
except twice at a baseball game and not letting her daughter's name be 
spoken on the place until after a while Father wouldn't even come down 
town anymore but just sat there all day with the decanter I could see the 


bottom ofhisnightshirt and hisbare legs and hear the decanter clinkinguntil finally T.P. had to pour itfor him and she says You have no respect 
for your Father's memory and I says I dont know why notit sure is 
preserved well enough to last onlyif I'm crazy tooGod knows what I'll do 
about itjustto look at water makes me sick and I'd just as soon swallow 
gasoline as a glass of whiskeyandLorraine telling them he maynotdrinkbutif you dontbelieve he's a man I can tell you how to find out she says If I 
catch you fooling with any of these whores you know what I'll do she says 
I'll whip her grabbing ather I'll whip her as long as I can find her she says 
and I says if I dont drink that's mybusiness but have you ever found me 
short I says I'll buy you enoughbeer to take a bathinif you want itbecause 
I've got every respect for a good honest whore because with Mother'shealth and the position I try to uphold to have her with no more respect forwhat I try to do for her than to make her name and my name and myMother's name abyword in the town.

 She had dodged out of sight somewhere. Saw me comingand dodged 
into another alley, running upand down the alleys with a dam showman 
in a red tie that everybody would look at and think whatkind of a dam man 
would wear a red tie. Well, the boy kept speaking to me and so I tookthe 
telegram without knowing I had taken it. I didn't realise what it wasuntil I 
was signing for it,and I tore it open without even caring much what it was. 
I knew all the time whatit wouldbe, I reckon. That was the only thing else 
that could happen, especially holding itup until I had already had the 
check entered on the pass book.

 I dont see how a city no bigger than New York can hold enough peopleto take the moneyaway from us country suckers. Work like hell all day 
every day, send them your moneyand get a little piece of paper back, Your 
account closed at 20.62. Teasing you along, letting you pile up a little paper 
profit, then banal Your account closed at 20.62. And if that wasn't enough, 
paying ten dollars amonth to somebody to tell you how to lose it fast, that 
either dont know anythingaboutit or is in cahoots with the telegraph 
company. Well, I'm done with them. They've sucked me in for the last time.
Any fool except a fellow that hasn't got any more sense than to take ajew'sword for anything could tell the market was going upall the time, with the 
whole dam delta about to be flooded again and the cotton washed right out 


of the ground like it was last year.Let it wash a man's crop out of the 
ground year after year, and them up there in Washington spending fifty 
thousand dollars a daykeeping an army in Nicarauga or some place.Of 
course it'll overflow again,and then cotton'll be worth thirty centsapound. 
Well, I just want to hit them one time and get my money back. I dont want 
a killing; only these small town gamblers are out for that, I just want my 
moneyback that these dam jews have gotten with all their guaranteed 
inside dope. Then I'm through; they can kiss myfoot for every other red 
cent of mine they get.

 I went back to the store. It washalf past three almost. Dam little time to 
do anythingin,but then I am used to that. I never had to go to Harvard to 
learn that. The band had quit playing. Got them all inside now, and they 
wouldn't have to waste any more wind. Earl says,

 "He found you, did he? He wasin here with ita while ago. I thought you 
were out back somewhere."

 "Yes," I says. "I got it. They couldn't keep it away from me allafternoon. 
The town's too small. I've got to go out home a minute," I says."You can 
dock me if it'll make you feel any better."

 "Go ahead," he says. "I can handle it now. No bad news, I hope."

 "You'll have to go to the telegraph office and find that out," I says. 
"They'll have time to tell you. I haven't."

 "I justasked," he says."Your mother knows she can depend on me."

 "She'll appreciate it," I says."Iwont be gone any longer than I have to."

 "Take your time," he says. "I can handle it now. You go ahead."

 I got the car and went home. Once this morning, twice at noon, and 
now again, with her and having tochase all over town and having to beg 
them to let me eat a little of the food I am paying for.Sometimes I thinkwhat's the use of anything. With the precedent I've been set I must be crazy 
to keep on. And now I reckon I'll get home justin time to take anice long 
drive after a basket of tomatoes orsomething and then have to goback to 
town smelling like a camphor factory so my head wont explode right on my 
shoulders. I keep telling her there's not a dam thing in thataspirin except 
flour and water for imaginary invalids. I says you dontknow what a 
headache is. I says you think I'd fool with that dam car atall ifit depended 
on me. I says I can get along without one I've learned to get along without 


lots of thingsbutif you want to risk yourself in that old wornout surrey 
with a halfgrown nigger boyall right because I saysGod looks after Ben's 
kind,God knowsHe ought to do somethingfor him but if you thinkI'm 
going to trust a thousand dollars' worth of delicate machinery to a 
halfgrown nigger or a grown one either, you'd better buy him one yourself 
because I says you like to ride in the car and you know you do.

Dilsey said she wasin the house. I went on into the hall and listened, 
but I didn't hear anything. I wentup stairs, but just as I passed her door 
she called me.

 "I just wanted to know who it was," she says."I'm here alone so much 
that I hear every sound." 
"You dont have to stay here," Isays."You could spend the whole day 
visiting like other women, ifyou wanted to."She came to the door. 
"I thought maybe you were sick," she says. "Having to hurry through 

your dinner like you did." 
"Better luck next time," I says."What do you want?" 
"Is anything wrong?" she says. 
"What could be?" I says. "CantI come home in the middle of the 

afternoon without upsetting the whole house?" 
"Have you seen Quentin?" she says. 
"She's in school," I says. 
"It's after three," she says."I heard the clock strike at least a halfan 

hour ago.She ought to be home by now." 
"Oughtshe?" I says."When have you ever seen her before dark?" 
"She ought to be home," she says. "When I was a girl--" 
"You had somebody to make you behave yourself," I says. "She hasn't." 
"I cant do anything withher," she says. "I've tried and I've tried." 
"And you wont let me, for some reason," I says."So you ought tobe 

satisfied." I went on to my room. Iturned the key easy and stood there 

until the knob turned. Then she says, 
"Jason." 
"What," I says. 
"I just thought something waswrong." 
"Not in here," I says. "You've come to the wrong place." 
"I dont mean to worry you," she says. 


 "I'm glad to hear that," I says."I wasn't sure. I thought I might have 
been mistaken. Do you want anything?"

 After a while she says,"No. Not any thing." Then she went away. Itookthe box down and counted out the money and hid the box again andunlocked the door and went out. Ithoughtabout the camphor,butitwouldbe too late now, anyway. And I'd just have one more round trip. She was at 
her door, waiting.

 "You want anything from town?" I says.

 "No," she says. "I dont mean to meddle in your affairs. But I dontknow 
what I'd do if anything happened to you, Jason."

 "I'm all right," I says."Just a headache."

 "I wish you'd take some aspirin," she says. "I know you're not going to 
stop using the car."

 "What's the car got to do with it?" I says. "How can a car give a man a 
headache?"

 "You know gasoline always made you sick," she says. "Ever since you 
were a child. I wish you'd take some aspirin."

 "Keep on wishing it," Isays. "Itwont hurt you."

 I got in the car and started back to town. I had just turned onto the 
street when I saw a ford coming helling toward me. All of asudden it 
stopped. I could hear the wheels slidingand itslewed around and backed 
and whirled and justas I was thinking what the hell they were up to, I saw 
that red tie. Then I recognised her face looking back through the window. 
It whirled into the alley. I saw it turn again,but when I got to the back 
street it was just disappearing, running like hell.

 I saw red. When I recognised that red tie, after all I had told her, I 
forgot about everything. I never thought about my head even until I came 
to the first forks and had to stop. Yet we spend money and spend money on 
roads and dam if itisn't like trying to drive over a sheet of corrugated iron 
roofing. I'd like to know how a man could be expected to keep up with even 
a wheelbarrow. I think too much of my car; I'm not going to hammerit to 
pieces like it was aford. Chanceswere they hadstolen it, anyway, so why 
should they give a dam. Like I sayblood always tells. Ifyou've got blood 
like that in you, you'll do anything. I says whatever claim youbelieve she 
has on you has alreadybeen discharged; I says from now on you have only 


yourself to blame because you know what any sensible person would do. I 
says if I've got to spend half my time being a dam detective, at leastI'll go 
where I can get paid for it.

 So I had to stop there at the forks. Then I remembered it. It felt like 
somebody wasinside with a hammer, beating on it. I says I've tried to keep 
you from being worried by her; I says far as I'm concerned, let her go to 
hell as fastas she pleases and the sooner the better. I says what else do youexpect except every dam drummer and cheap show that comes to town 
because even these town jellybeans give her the go-by now. You dont knowwhat goes on I says, you dont hearthe talk that I hear and you can just bet 
I shut them up too. I says my people owned slaves here when you allwere 
running little shirt tail country stores and farming land nonigger wouldlook at on shares.

 If they ever farmed it. It's a good thing the Lord did somethingfor thiscountry; the folks that live on itnever have. Friday afternoon, and from 
right here I could see three miles of land thathadn't even been broken, and 
every able bodied man in the county in town at thatshow. I might have 
been a stranger starving to death,and there wasn't a soul in sight toask 
which way to town even.And she trying to get me to take aspirin. I says 
when I eat bread I'll do it at the table. I says you always talking about how 
much you give upfor us when youcould buy ten new dresses a year on the 
money you spend for those dam patent medicines. It's not something to 
cure it I need it's just an even break not to have to have them but as long as 
I have to work ten hours a day to support a kitchen full of niggers in the 
style they're accustomed to and send them to the show where every other 
nigger in the county, only he was late already. By the time he got there it 
would be over.

 After a while he got up to the car and when I finally got it through hishead if two people in aford had passed him, he said yes. So I went on, andwhen I came to where the wagon road turned off I could see the tire tracks. 
Ab Russell wasin his lot,but I didn't bother to askhim and I hadn't got out 
of sight of hisbarn hardly when I saw the ford. They had tried to hide it. 
Done aboutas well at it asshe did at everything else she did.Like I say it'snot that I object to so much; maybe she cant help that, it'sbecause she 
hasn't even got enough consideration for her own family to have any 


discretion. I'm afraid all the time I'll run into them rightin the middle of 
the street or under a wagon on the square, like a couple of dogs.

 I parked and got out. And nowI'd have to go way around and cross a 
plowed field, the only one I had seen since I left town, with every step like 
somebody was walking alongbehind me, hitting me on the head with a 
club. I kept thinking that when I got across the field at least I'd have 
something level to walk on, that wouldn't jolt me every step, but when I got 
into the woods it was full of underbrushand I had to twist around through 
it, and then I came to a ditch full of briers. I went along itfor a while, butitgot thicker and thicker, and all the time Earl probably telephoning home 
about where I was and getting Mother all upset again.

 When I finally got through I had had to wind around so muchthat I had 
to stop and figure outjust where the car would be. I knew they wouldn't be 
far from it,justunder the closest bush, so I turned and worked backtoward the road. Then I couldn't tell just how far I was, so I'd have tostop 
and listen, and then withmy legsnot using so much blood, itall would go 
into my head like it would explode any minute, and the sun getting down 
just to where it could shine straight into my eyesand my ears ringing so I 
couldn't hear anything. I went on,trying to move quiet, then I hearda dog 
or somethingand I knew that when he scented me he'd have to come 
hellingup, then it would be all off.

 I had gotten beggar lice and twigs and stuffall over me, inside my 
clothes and shoes and all, and then I happened to lookaroundand Ihad 
my hand right on a bunch of poison oak. The only thing I couldn't 
understand was why it was just poison oak and nota snake or something. 
So I didn't even bother to move it. I just stood there until the dog went 
away. Then I went on.

 I didn't have any idea where the car was now. I couldn't think about 
anything except my head, and I'd just stand in one place and sort of 
wonder if I had really seen a ford even, and I didn't even care much 
whether I had or not. Like I say, let her lay out all day and allnight with 
everthing in town that wears pants, what do I care. I dont owe anything to 
anybody thathasno more consideration for me, that wouldn't be a dam bitabove planting thatford there and making me spend a whole afternoon 
and Earl taking her back there and showingher the booksjustbecause he's 


too dam virtuous for this world. I says you'll have one hell of a time in 
heaven, without anybody's business to meddle in only dont you ever let me 
catch you atit I says, I close my eyes to it because of your grandmother, but 
just you let me catch you doing it one time on this place, where my mother 
lives. These dam little slick haired squirts, thinking they are raising so 
much hell, I'll show them something abouthell I says, and you too.I'llmake him think that dam red tie is the latch string to hell, if he thinks he 
can run the woods with myniece.

With the sun and allin my eyes and myblood going so I kept thinkingevery time my head would go on and burst and get it over with, with briers 
and things grabbing at me, then I came onto the sand ditch where they had 
been and I recognised the tree where the car was, and just as I got out of 
the ditch and started running I heard the car start. It went off fast,blowingthe horn. They kept on blowingit,like it was saying Yah. Yah. 
Yaaahhhhhhhh, going out of sight. I got to the road just in time to see it go 
out of sight.

 By the time I got up to where my car was, they were clean out of sight, 
the horn stillblowing. Well, I neverthought anythingabout it exceptI was 
saying Run.Run back to town. Run home and try to convince Mother that I 
never saw you in that car. Try to make her believe that I dont know who he 
was. Try to make her believe that I didn't miss ten feet of catchingyou inthat ditch. Try to make her believe you were standingup, too.

 It kept on saying Yahhhhh, Yahhhhh, Yaaahhhhhhhhh, getting fainter 
and fainter. Then it quit,and I could hear a cow lowing up at Russell'sbarn.And still I never thought. I went up to the door and opened it and 
raised my foot. I kind of thought then that the car was leaning a little more 
than the slant of the road would be, but Inever found it outuntil I gotinand started off.

 Well, I just sat there. It was getting on toward sundown, and town was 
about five miles. They never even had guts enough to puncture it, tojab a 
hole in it. Theyjust let the air out.I just stood there for a while, thinkingabout thatkitchen full ofniggers and not one of them had time to lift a tire 
onto the rack and screw up a couple of bolts. It was kind of funny because 
even she couldn't have seen far enough ahead to take the pump out on 
purpose, unless she thought aboutit while he was letting out the airmaybe. 


But whatit probably was wassomebody took it out and gave it to Ben to 
play with for a squirt gun because they'd take the whole car to pieces if he 
wanted it and Dilsey says, Aintnobody teched yo car. What we wantto fool 
with hit fer? and I says You're a nigger. You're lucky, do you know it? I says 
I'll swap with you any day because it takes a white man not tohave 
anymore sense than to worry about what a little slut of a girl does.

 I walked up to Russell's. He had a pump. That wasjust an oversight on 
their part, I reckon. Only I still couldn't believe she'd have had the nerve to. 
I kept thinking that. I dontknowwhy it is I cant seem to learn that a 
woman'll do anything. I kept thinking, Let's forget for a while how I feel 
toward you and how you feel toward me: I just wouldn't do you this way. I 
wouldn't do you this wayno matter what you had done to me. Because like 
I say bloodis blood and you cant get around it. It'snot playinga joke that 
any eight year old boy could have thought of, it's letting your own uncle be 
laughed atby a man that would wear a red tie. They come into town and 
call us all abunch ofhicksand think it's too small to hold them. Well he 
doesn't know just how righthe is.And her too. If that's the way she feels 
about it, she'd better keep right on goingand a dam good riddance.

 I stopped and returned Russell's pump and drove on to town. I went tothe drugstore and got a shotand then I went to the telegraph office.It had 
closed at 20.21, forty points down. Forty times five dollars;buysomethingwith that if you can,and she'll say, I've got to have it I've just got to and I'llsay that's toobad you'll have to try somebody else, I haven't got any 
money; I've been toobusy to make any.

I just looked at him.

 "I'll tell you some news," I says. "You'll be astonished to learn that I am 
interested in the cotton market," Isays."That never occurred to you, didit?"

 "I did my best to deliver it," he says."I tried the store twice and calledup your house,but they didn't know where you were," he says, digging inthe drawer.

 "Deliver what?" I says. He handed me a telegram. "What time did thiscome?" I says.

 "About half past three," he says.

 "And nowit's ten minutes pastfive," I says. 


 "I tried to deliver it," he says. "I couldn't find you."

 "That's not myfault, isit?" I says. I opened it, just to see what kind of a 
lie they'd tell me this time. They must be in one hell of a shape if they've got 
to come all the way to Mississippi to steal ten dollars a month. Sell,it says. 
The market will be unstable, witha general downward tendency. Donot be 
alarmed following government report.

 "How much would a message like this cost?" I says.He told me.

 "They paid it,"he says.

 "Then Iowe them that much,"I says. "Ialready knew this. Send this 
collect," I says, takinga blank. Buy, I wrote, Market just on point of 
blowing its head off. Occasional flurries for purpose of hooking a few more 
country suckers who haven't got in to the telegraph office yet. Do notbe 
alarmed. "Send that collect," I says.

 He looked at the message, then he looked at the clock. "Market closed 
an hour ago," he says.

 "Well," I says."That's notmy fault either. I didn't invent it; Ijust 
bought a little ofit while under the impression that the telegraph company 
would keep me informed as to what it was doing."

 "A report is posted whenever it comes in," he says.

 "Yes," I says. "And in Memphisthey have it on a blackboard every ten 
seconds," I says. "I was within sixty-seven miles of there once thisafternoon."

 He looked at the message. "You want to send this?"he says.

 "I still haven't changed my mind," I says. I wrote the other one out and 
counted the money."And this one too, if you're sure you can spell b-u-y."

 I went back to the store. I could hear the band from down the street. 
Prohibition's a fine thing. Used tobe they'd come in Saturday with just one 
pair of shoesin the family and him wearing them, and they'd go down to 
the express office and get his package; now they all go to the show 
barefooted, with the merchants in the door like a row of tigers or 
something in a cage, watching them pass. Earl says,

 "I hope it wasn't anything serious."

 "What?"I says.He looked at his watch. Then he went to the door and 
looked at the courthouse clock. "You ought to have a dollar watch," I says. 
"It wont cost you so much to believe it's lying each time." 


 "What?" he says.

 "Nothing," I says. "Hope I haven't inconvenienced you."

 "We were not busy much," he says. "Theyall went to the show. It's all 
right."

 "If it's notall right," I says,"you know what you can do about it."

 "I said it was all right," he says.

 "I heard you," I says."And if it's not all right, you know what youcan do 
about it."

 "Do you want to quit?" he says.

 "It's not mybusiness," I says."My wishes dontmatter. But dont get the 
idea that you are protecting me by keeping me."

 "You'd be a good businessman if you'd let yourself, Jason," he says.

 "At least I can tend to my own business and let other people's alone," I 
says.

 "I dont know why youare trying to make me fire you," he says."You 
know you could quitanytime and there wouldn't be anyhard feelings 
between us."

 "Maybe that's why I dont quit," I says. "As longas I tend to myjob, 
that's what you are paying me for." I went on to the back and got a drink of 
water and went on out to the backdoor. Job had the cultivators all set up at 
last. It was quiet there, and pretty soon my head got a little easier. I couldhear them singing now, and then the band played again. Well, let them get 
every quarter and dime in the county; it was no skin offmy back. I've done 
whatI could; a man that can live as long as I have andnot know when to 
quit isa fool. Especially as it's nobusiness ofmine. If it was my own 
daughter now it would be different, because she wouldn't have time to; 
she'd have to work some to feed a few invalidsand idiots and niggers, 
because how could I have the face to bringanybody there. I've too much 
respect for anybody to do that. I'm a man, I can stand it, it's my own flesh 
and blood and I'd like to see the color of the man's eyes that would speak 
disrespectful of any woman that was my friend it's these dam good women 
that do it I'd like to see the good, church-going woman that's half assquare 
as Lorraine, whore or no whore. Like I say if I was to get married you'd go 
up like aballoon and youknowit and she says I want you tobe happy to 
have a family ofyour own not to slave your life away for us. But I'll be gone 


soon and then you can take a wife but you'll never find a woman whoisworthy of you and I says yes I could. You'd get right up out of your grave 
you know you would. I says no thank you I have all the women I can take 
care of now if I married a wife she'd probably turn out to be ahophead or 
something. That's all we lack in this family, I says.

 The sun was down beyond the Methodist church now,and the pigeons 
were flying back and forth aroundthe steeple, and when the band stopped 
I could hear them cooing. It hadn't been four months since Christmas, and 
yet they were almost as thick as ever. I reckon Parson Walthall was gettinga bellyfull of them now. You'd have thought we were shooting people, with 
him making speeches and even holding onto a man's gun when they came 
over. Talking about peace on earth good will toward all and not asparrow 
can fall to earth.But what does he care how thick they get, he hasn'tgot 
anything to do: what does he care what time itis.He pays no taxes, he 
doesn't have to see his money going every year to have the courthouse 
clock cleaned to where it'll run. They had to pay a man forty-five dollars to 
clean it. I counted over a hundred half-hatched pigeons on the ground. 
You'd think they'd have sense enough to leave town. It's a good thing I dont 
have anymore ties than a pigeon, I'll say that.

 The band was playing again,a loud fast tune, like they were breakingup. I reckon they'd be satisfiednow. Maybe they'd have enough music to 
entertain them while they drove fourteen or fifteen miles home and 
unharnessed in the dark and fed the stock and milked. All they'd have to do 
would be to whistle the music andtell the jokes to the live stock in the 
barn,and then they could count up how much they'd made bynot takingthe stock to the show too. They could figure that ifa man had five children 
and seven mules, he cleared a quarter by taking his family to the show. Just 
like that. Earl came back with a couple of packages.

 "Here's some more stuff goingout," he says."Where's Uncle Job?"

 "Gone to the show, Iimagine,"I says. "Unless you watched him."

 "He doesn't slip off," he says."I can depend on him.

 "Meaning me by that," I says.

 He went to the door and looked out, listening.

 "That's a good band,"he says."It's about time they were breakingup, 
I'd say." 


 "Unless they're going to spendthe night there," I says. The swallows 
had begun, and I could hear the sparrows beginning to swarm in the trees 
in the courthouse yard. Every oncein a while a bunch of them would come 
swirlingaround in sightabove the roof, then go away. They are as big a 
nuisance as the pigeons, to mynotion. You cant even sit in the courthouse 
yard for them. First thing you know, bing. Right on your hat.Butitwouldtake a millionaire to afford to shoot them at five cents ashot. If they'd just 
put a little poison out there in the square, they'd get rid of them in aday, 
because if a merchant cant keep his stock from runningaround the square, 
he'd better try to deal in something besides chickens, something that dont 
eat, like plows or onions. And ifaman dont keep his dogsup, he either 
dontwantit or he hasn't anybusiness with one. Like I say if all the 
businesses in a town are run like countrybusinesses, you're going tohave a 
country town.

 "It wont do you any good if they have broke up," I says. "They'll have to 
hitch up and take out to get home by midnight asit is."

 "Well," he says."They enjoy it.Let them spend a little money on a show 
now and then. A hill farmer works pretty hard and gets mighty little for it."

 "There's no law making them farm in the hills," I says."Or anywhere 
else."

 "Where would you and me be, if it wasn't for the farmers?" he says.

 "I'd be home right now," I says. "Lying down, withan ice pack on my 
head."

 "You have these headaches toooften,"he says."Why dontyou have 
your teeth examined good? Did he go over them all this morning?"

 "Did who?" I says.

 "You said you went to the dentist this morning.

 "Do you object to my having the headache on your time?" I says."Is that 
it?" They were crossing the alleynow, comingup from the show.

 "There they come," he says. "I reckon I better get up front." He went on. 
It's a curious thing how, no matter what's wrong with you, a man'll tell you 
to have your teeth examined and a woman'll tell you to get married. It 
always takes a man that never made much at any thing to tell youhow to 
run your business, though. Like these college professors without a whole 
pair of socks to hisname, telling you how to make a million in ten years, 


and a woman that couldn't even get a husband can always tell you how to 
raise a family.

Old man Job came up with the wagon. After a while he got through 
wrapping the lines around the whip socket.

 "Well," I says."Wasit a good show?"

 "I aint been yit,"he says."But I kin be arrested in dat tent tonight, 
dough."

 "Like hell you haven't," I says. "You've been away from here since three 
oclock. Mr Earl was just back here looking for you."

 "I been tendin to mybusiness," he says. "Mr Earl knows whar I been."

 "You may can fool him," I says."I wont tell on you."

 "Den he's de onliest man here I'd try to fool," he says. "Whut I want to 
waste my time foolin a man whut I dont keer whether I sees him Sat'dy 
night er not? I wont try to fool you," he says."You too smart fer me. Yes, 
suh," he says, lookingbusy as hell,putting five or six little packagesinto 
the wagon. "You's too smart fer me. Aint aman in dis town kin keep up widyou fer smartness. You fools aman whut sosmart he cant even keep up widhisself," he says, gettingin the wagon and unwrapping the reins.

 "Who's that?" I says.

 "Dat's Mr Jason Compson," he says."Git up dar, Dan!"

 One of the wheels was just about to come off. I watched to see if he'd get 
out of the alleybefore it did. Just turn any vehicle over to a nigger, though. 
I says that old rattletrap's just an eyesore, yet you'll keep it standing there 
in the carriage house a hundred years just so thatboy can ride to the 
cemetery once a week. I says he's notthe first fellow that'll have to do 
things he doesn't want to. I'd make him ride in that car like a civilised man 
or stay at home. What does he know about where he goes or what he goesin, and us keepinga carriage and a horse so he can take a ride on Sunday 
afternoon.

A lot Job cared whether the wheel came off or not, long as he wouldn't 
have too far to walkback. Like I say the only place for them isin the field, 
where they'd have to work from sunup to sundown. They cantstand 
prosperity or an easyjob. Let one stay around white people for a while and 
he's not worth killing. They get sothey can outguess youabout workbefore 
your very eyes, like Roskus the only mistake he ever made was he got 


careless one day and died. Shirking and stealing and giving you a littlemore lip and a little more lipuntilsome day youhave to lay them out with 
a scantling or something. Well, it's Earl's business. But I'd hate to have my 
business advertised over this town by an old doddering nigger and awagon 
that you thought every time it turned a corner it would come all to pieces.

 The sun was all highup in the air now, and inside it wasbeginning to 
get dark. I went up front. The square was empty. Earl was back closing the 
safe, and then the clock begun to strike.

 "You lock the back door?" he says. I went back and locked it and came 
back."I suppose you're going to the show tonight," he says. "I gave you 
those passes yesterday, didn't I?"

 "Yes," I says. "You want them back?"

 "No, no," he says."I just forgotwhether I gave them to you or not. No 
sense in wasting them."

 He locked the door and said Goodnight and went on. The sparrows 
were still rattling awayin the trees, but the square was empty except for afew cars. There was a ford in frontof the drugstore, but I didn't even look 
at it. I know when I've had enough of anything. I dont mind trying tohelp 
her, but I know when I've had enough. I guess I could teach Luster to drive 
it, then they could chase her all day long if they wanted to, and I could stay 
home and play with Ben.

 I went in and got a couple of cigars. Then I thought I'd have another 
headache shot for luck,and I stood and talked with them a while.

 "Well," Mac says. "I reckon you've got your money on the Yankees thisyear."

 "What for?" I says.

 "The Pennant," he says. "Not anythingin the league can beat them."

 "Like hell there's not," I says."They're shot," I says. "You think ateam 
can be that luckyforever?"

 "I dont call it luck," Mac says.

 "I wouldn't bet on any team that fellow Ruth played on," I says. "Even if 
I knew it was going to win."

 "Yes?" Mac says.

 "I can name you a dozen men in either league who're more valuablethan he is," I says. 


 "Whathave you got against Ruth?" Mac says.

 "Nothing," I says. "Ihaven't got any thingagainsthim. I dont evenlike 
to look at his picture." I went on out. The lights were coming on, and 
people going along the streets toward home. Sometimes the sparrows 
never got still until full dark. The night they turned on the new lights 
around the courthouse it waked them up and they were flying around and 
blunderinginto the lights allnightlong. They kept it up two or three 
nights, then one morning they were allgone. Then after about two months 
they all came back again.

 I drove on home. There were no lights in the house yet, but they'd all be 
looking out the windows, and Dilsey jawing away in the kitchen like it was 
her own food she was having tokeep hotuntil I got there. You'd think to 
hear her that there wasn't but one supper in the world, and that was the 
one she had to keep back a few minutes on myaccount. Well at leastI 
could come home one time without findingBen and thatnigger hanging on 
the gate like a bear and amonkey in the same cage. Just let it come toward 
sundown and he'd head for the gate like a cow for the barn, hangingonto itand bobbing his head and sort ofmoaning to himself. That's a hogfor 
punishment for you. If what had happenedto him for fooling with open 
gates had happened to me, I neverwould want to see another one. I often 
wondered what he'd be thinking about, down there at the gate, watchingthe girls goinghome from school, trying to want somethinghe couldn'teven remember he didn't and couldn't want any longer. And what he'd 
think when they'd be undressing him and he'd happen to take a lookat 
himselfand begin to cry like he'd do. But like I say theynever did enough 
of that. I says I know what you need you need what they did to Ben then 
you'd behave. And if you dontknow what that was I says, ask Dilseyto tell 
you.

 There was a light in Mother's room. I put the car up and went on into 
the kitchen. Luster and Ben were there.

 "Where's Dilsey?" I says."Putting supper on?"

 "She up stairs wid Miss Cahline," Luster says. "Deybeen goin hit.Ever 
since Miss Quentin come home. Mammyup there keepin um fum fightin.
Is dat show come, Mr Jason?"

 "Yes," I says. 


 I thought I heard de band," he says."Wish I could go," he says. "Icouldef I jes had a quarter."

Dilsey came in."You come, is you?"she says."Whut you been upto disevenin? You knows how much work I got to do; whyn't you git here on 
time?"

 "Maybe I went to the show," I says. "Is supper ready?"

 "Wish I could go," Luster says. "I could ef I jes had a quarter."

 "You aint gotno business at no show," Dilsey says."You go on in de 
house and set down," she says."dont you goup stairs and gitum started 
again,now."

 "What's the matter?" I says.

 "Quentin come in a while agoand says youbeen follerin her around allevenin and den Miss Cahline jumped on her. Whyn't you let her alone? 
Cant you live in de same house wid yo own blood niece widout quoilin?"

 "I cant quarrel with her," I says, "because I haven't seen her since thismorning. What does she say I've done now? made her go to school? That'spretty bad," I says.

 "Well, you tend to yo businessand let her lone," Dilseysays."I'll take 
keer of her ef you'n Miss Cahline'lllet me. Go on in afar now and behave 
yoself swell I git supper on."

 "Ef I jes had a quarter," Luster says,"I could go to dat show."

 "En ef you had wingsyou could fly to heaven," Dilsey says."I dont want 
to hear another word about dat show."

 "That reminds me," I says. "I've got a couple of tickets they gave me." Itook them out of my coat.

 "You fixin touse um?" Luster says.

 "Not me," I says. "I wouldn't go to it for ten dollars."

 "Gimme one ofum, Mr Jason," he says.

 "I'll sell you one," I says."Howabout it?"

 "I aint got no money," he says.

 "That's too bad," I says. I made to go out.

 "Gimme one ofum, Mr Jason," he says. "You aint gwine need um bofe."

 "Hush yo motif," Dilsey says."dont you know he aint gwine give nothinaway?"

 "How much you want fer hit?"he says. 


 "Five cents," I says.

 "I aint got dat much," he says.

 "How much you got?" I says.

 "I aint got nothin," he says.

 "All right," I says. I went on.

 "Mr Jason," he says.

 "Whyn't you hush up?" Dilsey says. "He jes teasin you.He fixin touse 
dem tickets hisself.Go on, Jason,and let him lone."

 "I dont want them," I says. I came back to the stove. "I came in here to 
burn them up.Butif you want to buy one for a nickel?" I says, looking at 
him and opening the stove lid.

 "I aint got dat much," he says.

 "All right," I says. I dropped one of them in the stove.

 "You, Jason," Dilsey says. "Aint you shamed?"

 "Mr Jason," he says."Please, suh. I'll fix dem tires ev'y day fer a mont."

 "I need the cash," I says. "You can have it for anickel."

 "Hush, Luster," Dilsey says.She jerked him back."Go on," she says. 
"Drop hit in.Go on.Git hit over with."

 "You can have it for anickel," Isays.

 "Go on," Dilsey says. "He aint got no nickel. Go on. Drop hit in."

 "All right," I says. I dropped it in and Dilsey shut the stove.

 "Abig growed man like you," she says. "Git on outen my kitchen. 
Hush," she says to Luster. "Dont you gitBenjy started. I'll git you a quarter 
fum Frony tonight and you kin gotomorrow night.Hush up,now."

 I went on into the living room.I couldn't hear anything from upstairs. I 
opened the paper. After a while Ben and Luster came in.Ben went tothe 
dark place on the wall where the mirror used to be, rubbing his hands on it 
and slobbering and moaning. Luster begun punchingat the fire.

 "What're you doing?" I says."We dont need any fire tonight."

 "I tryin to keep him quiet," he says. "Hitalways cold Easter," he says.

 "Only this is notEaster," I says. "Let it alone."

 He put the poker back and got the cushion out of Mother's chair and 
gave it to Ben,and he hunkered down in front of the fireplace and got 
quiet.

 I read the paper. There hadn't been a sound from upstairs when Dilsey 


came in and sentBen and Luster on to the kitchen and said supper was 
ready. 
"All right," I says.She went out. I sat there, reading the paper. After a 

while I heard Dilsey looking in at the door. 
"Whyn't you come on and eat?" she says. 
"I'm waiting for supper," I says. 
"Hit's on the table," she says. "I done told you." 
"Is it?" I says."Excuse me. I didn't hear anybody come down." 
"They aint comin," she says."You come on and eat, so I can take 

something up to them." 
"Are they sick?" I says."What did the doctor say it was? Not Smallpox, I 

hope." 
"Come on here, Jason," she says. "So Ikin git done." 
"All right," I says, raising the paper again. "I'm waiting for supper now." 
I could feel her watching me at the door. I read the paper. 
"Whut you want to act like thisfer?" she says. "When youknows how 

much bother I has anyway."

 "If Mother is any sicker than she was when she came down to dinner, all 
right," I says. "Butas long as I am buying come down to the table to eat it. 
Let me know when supper's ready," I says, reading the paper again. I heard 
her climbing the stairs, dragging her feet and grunting and groaninglike 
they were straight up and three feet apart. I heard her at Mother's door, 
then I heard her calling Quentin, like the door was locked, then she went 
back to Mother's room and then Mother went and talked to Quentin.Then 
they came down stairs. I read the paper.

Dilsey came back to the door. "Come on," she says, "foyoukin think up 
some mo devilment. You just tryin yoself tonight." 
I wentto the diningroom. Quentin was sitting with her head bent. She 

had painted her face again. Her nose looked like a porcelain insulator. 
"I'm glad you feel well enough to come down," I says to Mother. 
"It's little enough I can do for you, to come to the table," she says."No 

matter how I feel. I realise that when a man works all dayhe likes tobe 
surrounded by hisfamily at the supper table. I want to please you. I only 
wish you and Quentin got along better. It would be easier for me."

 "We get along all right," I says."I dont mind her staying locked upin 


her room all day if she wants to. But I cant have all this whoop-de-do and 
sulkingat mealtimes. I know that's a lot to ask her, but I'm that way in myown house. Your house, I meant to say."

 "It's yours," Mother says."Youare the head of it now." 
Quentin hadn't looked up. I helped the plates and she begun to eat. 
"Did you get a good piece of meat?" I says. "If you didn't, I'll try to find

you abetter one." 
She didn't say anything. 
"I say, did you get a good piece of meat?" Isays. 
"What?" she says."Yes. It's all right." 
"Will you have some more rice?" I says. 
"No," she says. 
"Better let me give you some more," I says. 
"I dont wantanymore," she says. 
"Not at all," I says."You're welcome." 
"Is your headache gone?" Mother says. 
"Headache?" Isays. 
"I was afraid you were developing one," she says. "When you came in 

this afternoon." 
"Oh," I says."No, it didn't show up. We stayed so busy this afternoon I 
forgot about it."

 "Was that why you were late?"Mother says. I could see Quentinlistening. I looked at her. Her knife and fork were still going,but I caught 
her looking atme, then she looked at her plate again. I says,

 "No. I loaned my car to a fellow about three oclock and I had to wait 

until he got back with it." I ate fora while. 
"Who was it?" Mother says. 
"It was one of those show men," I says."It seems his sister's husband 

was out riding withsome town woman,and he was chasing them." 
Quentin sat perfectly still, chewing. 
"You ought not to lend your car to people like that," Mother says."You 

are too generous withit. That's why I never call on you for it if I can help 
it." 
"I was beginning to think thatmyself, for a while," I says. "But he got 
back, all right. He says he found what he was lookingfor." 


 "Who was the woman?"Mother says.

 "I'll tell you later," I says."I dont like to talk about such thingsbefore 
Quentin." Quentin had quit eating. Every once in a while she'd take adrinkof water, then she'd sit there crumbling abiscuitup, her face bent over her 
plate.

 "Yes," Mother says."I suppose women who stay shutup like I dohave 
no idea what goes on in this town."

 "Yes," I says. "They dont."

 "My life has been so different from that,"Mother says."ThankGod I 
dont know about such wickedness. I dont even want to know about it. I'm 
not like most people."

 I didn't say any more. Quentin sat there, crumbling the biscuituntil I 
quit eating. Then she says,

 "Can I gonow?" without looking at anybody.

 "What?" I says."Sure, you can go. Were you waiting on us?"

 She looked at me. She had crumpled all the bread, but her hands stillwent on like they were crumpling it yet and her eyes looked like they were 
cornered or something and then she started biting her mouth like itought 
to have poisoned her, with all thatred lead.

 "Grandmother," she says. "Grandmother--"

 "Did you want something else to eat?" I says.

 "Why does he treat me like this, Grandmother?" she says. "Inever hurt 
him."

 "I want you all to get along with one another," Mother says. "Youare allthat's left now, and I do want youall to get alongbetter."

 "It's his fault," she says. "He wont let me alone, and I have to. If hedoesn't want me here, why wont he let me go back to--"

 "That's enough," I says."Not another word."

 "Then why wont he let me alone?" she says."He--he just--"

 "He is the nearest thing to a father you've ever had,"

 Mother says. "It's his bread you and I eat. It's only right that he shouldexpect obedience from you."

 "It's hisfault," she says. She jumped up. "He makes me do it. Ifhe 
would just--" she looked at us, hereyes cornered, kind of jerking her arms 
against her sides. 


 "If I would just what?" I says.

 "Whatever I do, it's your fault," she says."If I'm bad, it's because I had 
to be. You made me. I wish I was dead. I wish we were all dead." Then she 
ran. We heard her run up the stairs. Then a door slammed.

 "That's the first sensible thing she ever said," I says.

 "She didn't go to school today,"Mother says.

 "How do you know?" I says. "Were you down town?"

 "I justknow," she says. "I wishyou couldbe kinder to her."

 "If I did that I'd have to arrange to see her more than once a day,"I 
says."You'll have to make her come to the table every meal. Then I could 
give her an extra piece of meat every time."

 "There are little things you could do," she says.

 "Like not paying any attention when youask me to see that she goes to 
school?" I says.

 "She didn't go toschool today," she says."I just know she didn't. She 
says she wentfor a car ride with one of the boys thisafternoon and you 
followed her."

 "How could I," I says."When somebody had my car all afternoon? 
Whether or not she was in school today is already past," I says. "If you've 
got to worry aboutit, worry aboutnext Monday."

 "I wanted youand she to get along with one another," she says. "But she 
has inherited all of the headstrong traits. Quentin's too. I thoughtat the 
time, with the heritage she would already have, to give her that name, too. 
Sometimes I think she is the judgment ofboth of them upon me.""Good 
Lord," I says. "You've got a fine mind. No wonder you keep yourself sick allthe time."

 "What?" she says."I dontunderstand."

 "I hope not," I says."A good woman missesa lot she's better off without 
knowing."

 "They were both that way,"she says."They would make interest with 
your father against me when I tried to correct them. He was always sayingthey didn't need controlling, that they already knew what cleanliness and 
honesty were, which was all that anyone could hope to be taught. And now 
I hope he's satisfied."

 "You've got Ben to depend on," I says. "Cheer up." 


 "They deliberately shut me outof their lives," she says."It wasalways 
her and Quentin. They were always conspiring against me. Against you too, 
though you were too young to realise it. They always looked on youand me 
as outsiders, like they did your Uncle Maury. I always told yourfather that 
they were allowed too much freedom, to be together too much. When 
Quentin started to school we had to let her go the next year, so she could be 
with him.She couldn't bear for any of you to do anything she couldn't. It 
was vanity in her, vanity and false pride. And then when her troubles began 
I knew that Quentin would feel that he had to do somethingjust asbad. 
But I didn'tbelieve that he wouldhave been so selfishas to-–I didn't 
dream that he--"

 "Maybe he knew it was going to be a girl," I says."And that one more of 
them would be more than he could stand."

 "He could have controlled her," she says."He seemed to be the onlyperson she had any consideration for. But thatis a part of the judgment 
too, I suppose."

 "Yes," I says. "Toobad it wasn't me instead ofhim. You'd be a lotbetter 
off."

 "You say things like that to hurt me," she says. "I deserve it though. 
When they began to sell the land to send Quentin to Harvard I told your 
father that he must make an equalprovision for you. Then when Herbert 
offered to take you into the bank Isaid, Jason is provided for now, and 
when all the expense began to pile up and I was forced to sell our furniture 
and the rest of the pasture, I wrote her at once because I said she will 
realise that she and Quentin have had their share and part of Jason's too 
and thatit depends on her now tocompensate him. I said she will do that 
out of respect for her father. I believed that, then. But I'mjusta poor oldwoman; I was raised tobelieve that people would deny themselves for their 
own flesh and blood. It's my fault.You were right to reproach me."

 "Do you think I need anyman's help to stand on my feet?" I says."Let 
alone a woman that cantname the father of her own child."

 "Jason,"she says.

 "All right," I says."I didn't mean that. Of course not."

 "If I believed that were possible, after all my suffering."

 "Of course it'snot," I says."I didn't mean it." 


 "I hope that at least is spared me," she says.

 "Sure itis," I says."She's too much like both of them to doubt that."

 "I couldn't bear that," she says.

 "Then quit thinking about it," I says."Has she been worrying youany 
more about getting out atnight?"

 "No.I made her realise that itwas for her own good and that she'd 
thank me for it some day.She takes her books withher and studies after I 
lock the door. I see the light on as late as eleven oclock some nights."

 "How do you know she's studying?" I says.

 "I dont know what else she'd do in there alone," she says. "She never didread any."

 "No," I says. "You wouldn't know. And you can thankyour starsfor 
that," I says. Only what would be the use in sayingit aloud. It would just 
have her crying on me again.

 I heard her go up stairs. Then she called Quentin and Quentin says 
What? through the door. "Goodnight," Mother says. Then I heard the key 
in the lock, and Mother went backto her room.

 When I finished my cigar andwent up,the light was still on. I could see 
the empty keyhole, but I couldn't hear a sound. She studied quiet. Maybe 
she learned that in school. I told Mother goodnight and went on tomyroom and got the box outand counted it again. I could hear the Great 
American Geldingsnoring away like a planingmill. I read somewhere 
they'd fix men that way to give them women's voices. But maybe he didn't 
know what they'd done to him. I dont reckon he even knew what he had 
been trying to do, or why Mr Burgess knocked him outwith the fence 
picket. And if they'd just sent him on to Jackson while he was under the 
ether, he'd never have known the difference. But that would have been too 
simple for a Compson to think of.Not half complex enough.Havingto waitto do it at all until he broke outand tried to run a little girl down on the 
street with her own father lookingat him. Well, like I say theynever started 
soon enough with their cutting,and they quit too quick. Iknow at least two 
more that needed something like that, andone of them not over a mileaway, either. But then I dont reckon even that would do any good. Like I 
say once abitchalways abitch. And just let me have twenty-four hours 
withoutany dam New York jew to advise me what it's going to do. I don't 


want to make a killing; save that to suck in the smart gamblers with. Ijust 
want an even chance to get my money back. And once I've done that they 
can bringall Beale street and all bedlam in here and two of them can sleepin mybed and another one can have my place at the table too. 


April 8, 1928 

The day dawned bleak and chill, amoving wall of gray light out of the 
northeast which,instead of dissolvinginto moisture, seemed to 
disintegrate into minute and venomous particles, like dust that, when 
Dilsey opened the door of the cabin and emerged, needled laterally into her 
flesh, precipitating not so much amoisture as a substance partakingof the 
quality of thin, not quite congealed oil. She wore a stiff blackstraw hat 
perched upon her turban, and a maroon velvet cape with a border of 
mangy and anonymousfur above a dress of purple silk, and she stood inthe door for a while with her myriad and sunken face lifted to the weather, 
and one gaunt hand flac-soled as the belly of a fish, then she moved the 
cape aside and examined the bosom of her gown.

 The gown fell gauntly from her shoulders, across her fallen breasts, then 
tightened upon her paunch and fell again, ballooning a little above the 
nether garments whichshe wouldremove layer by layer as the springaccomplished and the warm days,in color regal and moribund.She had 
been abig woman once but now her skeleton rose, draped loosely inunpadded skin that tightened again upon a paunch almost dropsical, as 
though muscle and tissue had been courage or fortitude which the days or 
the years had consumed until only the indomitable skeleton was leftrising 
like a ruin or a landmarkabove the somnolentand impervious guts,and 
above that the collapsed face that gave the impression of the bones 
themselves being outside the flesh,lifted into the driving day with an 
expression at once fatalistic and of a child's astonished disappointment, 
until she turned and entered the house again and closed the door.

 The earth immediately about the door was bare. It had a patina,as 
though from the soles of bare feet in generations, like old silver or the wallsof Mexican houses which have been plastered by hand. Beside the house, 
shading it in summer, stood three mulberry trees, the fledged leaves that 
would later be broad and placid asthe palms of hands streamingflatlyundulant upon the driving air. A pair of jaybirds came upfrom nowhere, 
whirled up on the blast like gaudyscraps of cloth or paper and lodged inthe mulberries, where they swungin raucous tilt and recover, screaming 
into the wind that ripped their harsh cries onward and away like scraps of 


paper or of cloth in turn. Then three more joined them and they swung and 
tilted in the wrung branches for a time, screaming. The door of the cabinopened and Dilsey emerged once more, this time in aman's felt hatand an 
army overcoat, beneath the frayed skirts of which her blue gingham dress 
fell in uneven balloonings, streaming too abouther as she crossed the yardand mounted the steps to the kitchen door.

 A moment later she emerged, carrying an open umbrella now, which she 
slanted ahead into the wind, and crossed to the woodpile and laid the 
umbrella down, still open. Immediately she caughtat it and arrested it and 
held to it for a while, looking about her. Then she closed it and laid it down 
and stacked stovewood intoher crooked arm, against herbreast, and 
picked up the umbrella and got itopen at last and returned to the steps and 
held the wood precariously balanced while she contrived to close the 
umbrella, which she propped in the corner just within the door. She 
dumped the wood into the box behind the stove. Then she removed the 
overcoat and hat and took a soiled apron down from the wall and putit on 
and builta fire in the stove. While she was doingso, rattling the grate bars 
and clattering the lids, Mrs Compson began to call her from the headof the 
stairs.

 She wore a dressing gown of quilted black satin, holding it close under 
her chin. In the other hand she held a red rubber hot water bottle and she 
stood at the head of the back stairway, calling "Dilsey"at steady and 
inflectionless intervals into the quiet stairwell that descended into 
complete darkness, then opened again where a gray window fell across it. 
"Dilsey," she called, without inflection or emphasis or haste, as though she 
were not listening for a reply at all. "Dilsey."

Dilsey answered and ceased clattering the stove, but before she couldcross the kitchen Mrs Compson called her again, and before she crossed 
the diningroom and brought her head into relief against the gray splash of 
the window, still again.

 "All right," Dilsey said. "All right, here I is. I'll fill hit soon ez I git some 
hot water." She gathered up her skirts and mounted the stairs, whollyblotting the gray light. "Put hit down dar en g'awn back tobed."

 "I couldn't understand what was the matter," Mrs Compson said."I've 
been lying awake for an hour at least, withouthearing a sound from the 


kitchen."

 "You puthit down and g'awn back to bed," Dilsey said.She toiled 
painfullyup the steps, shapeless, breathing heavily."I'll have de fire gwinein aminute, en de water hot in two mot"

 "I've been lying there for an hour, at least," Mrs Compson said. "I 
thought maybe you were waiting for me to come down and start the fire."

Dilsey reached the top of the stairs and took the waterbottle. "I'll fix hitin aminute," she said. "Luster overslep dis mawnin,up half de nightat dat 
show. I gwine build de fire myself.Go on now, so you wont wake de others 
swell I ready."

 "If you permit Luster to do things that interfere with his work, you'llhave to suffer for it yourself," MrsCompson said."Jason wont like this ifhe hears about it. You know he wont."

"'Twusn'tnone of Jason's money he went on," Dilsey said. "Dat's one 
thing shot"She went on down the stairs. Mrs Compson returned to her 
room. As she got into bed again she could hear Dilsey yet descending the 
stairs witha sort of painfuland terrific slowness that would have become 
maddening had itnot presently ceased beyond the flapping diminishment 
of the pantry door.

 She entered the kitchen andbuilt up the fire andbegan to prepare 
breakfast. In the midst of this she ceased and went to the window and 
looked out toward her cabin, then she went to the door and opened it and 
shouted into the driving weather.

 "Luster!" she shouted, standingto listen, tiltingher face from the wind. 
"You, Luster!" She listened, then as she prepared to shout again Luster 
appeared around the corner of the kitchen.

 "Ma'am?" he said innocently,soinnocently that Dilsey looked down at 
him, for amoment motionless, with something more than mere surprise.

 "Whar youat?" she said.

 "Nowhere," he said. "Jes in de cellar."

 "Whut you coin in de cellar?" she said. "Dont stand dar in de rain,fool," 
she said.

 "Aint coin nothin," he said. He came up the steps.

 "Dont you dare come in dis dowidout a armful of wood," she said. "Here 
Idone had to tote yo wood en build yo fire bofe. Didn't I tole you not to 


leave dis place last night befo datwoodbox wusfull to de top?"

 "I did," Luster said. "I filled hit."

 "Whar hit gone to, den?"

 "I dont know'm. Iaint teched hit."

 "Well, you git hit full up now," she said. "And git on up dar en see bout 
Benjy."

 She shut the door. Luster went to the woodpile. The five jaybirds 
whirled over the house, screaming, and into the mulberries again. He 
watched them. He picked up a rock and threw it. "Whoo," he said. "Git on 
back to hell, whar you belong at. 'Taint Monday yit."

 He loaded himself mountainously with stove wood. He could not see 
over it, and he staggered to the steps and up them andblundered crashing 
against the door, sheddingbillets.Then Dilsey came and opened the door 
for him and he blundered across the kitchen."You, Luster!"Hah!"" she 
shouted, but he had already hurled the wood into the box with a 
thunderous crash. "Hah!" he said.

 "Is you tryin to wake up de whole house?" Dilsey said. She hit him on 
the back of his head with the flat of her hand. "Go on up dar and gitBenjy 
dressed, now."

 "Yessum," he said. He went toward the outer door.

 "Whar you gwine Dilsey said.

 "I thought Ibetter go round de house en in by de front, so I wontwake 
up Miss Cahline en dem."

 "You go on up dem back stairs like I tole you en gitBenjy's clothes on 
him," Dilsey said. "Go on, now."

 "Yessum," Luster said. He returned and left by the diningroom door. 
After a while it ceased to flap. Dilsey prepared to make biscuit. As she 
ground the sifter steadily above the bread board, she sang, to herselfat 
first, something without particular tune or words, repetitive, mournful and 
plaintive, austere, as she ground afaint, steady snowing of flour ontothe 
bread board. The stove had begun to heat the room and to fill it with 
murmurous minors of the fire, and presently she was singing louder,as ifher voice too had been thawed outbythe growing warmth, and then Mrs 
Compson called her name again from within the house. Dilsey raised her 
face as ifher eyes could and did penetrate the walls and ceiling and saw the 


old woman in her quilted dressinggown at the head of the stairs, callingher name with machinelike regularity.

 "Oh, Lawd," Dilsey said. She set the sifter down and swept up the hem of 
her apron and wiped her handsand caught up the bottle from the chair on 
which she had laid it and gathered her apron about the handle of the kettlewhich was nowjetting faintly. "Jes a minute," she called. "De water jes disminute got hot."

 It was not the bottle which MrsCompson wanted, however, and 
clutchingit by the neck like a dead hen Dilsey went to the foot of the stairs 
and looked upward.

 "Aint Luster up dar wid him?" she said.

 "Luster hasn't been in the house. I've been lying here listeningfor him. I 
knew he would be late,but I did hope he'd come in time to keep Benjaminfrom disturbing Jason on Jason'sone day in the week to sleep in the 
morning."

 "I dont see how you expect anybody to sleep, wid you standin in de hall,
holl'in at folks fum de crack of dawn," Dilsey said. She began tomount the 
stairs, toiling heavily."I sent datboy up dar halfan hour ago."

 Mrs Compson watched her, holding the dressing gown under her chin.
"What are you going to do?" she said.

 "Gwine git Benjy dressed en bring him down to de kitchen, whar he 
wont wake Jason en Quentin," Dilsey said.

 "Haven't you started breakfastyet?"

 "I'll tend to dat too," Dilsey said. "Youbetter git back in bed swell Luster 
make yo fire. Hit cold dis mawnin."

 "I know it," Mrs Compson said."My feet are like ice. They were so coldthey waked me up."She watched Dilsey mount the stairs. It took her a long 
while. "Youknow howit frets Jason when breakfast is late," Mrs Compson 
said.

 "I cant do but one thingat a time," Dilsey said. "You git on back tobed, 
fo I has you on my hands dismawnin too."

 "If you're going to drop everything to dress Benjamin, I'd better come 
down and get breakfast. You know as well as I do how Jason acts when it'slate."

 "En who gwine eat yo messin?"Dilsey said. "Tell me dat. Go on now," 


she said, toilingupward. Mrs Compson stood watching her as she 
mounted, steadying herself against the wall with one hand, holding her 
skirts up with the other.

 "Are you going to wake him up just to dress him?" she said.

Dilsey stopped. With her foot lifted to the next step she stood there, her 
hand against the wall and the graysplash of the window behind her, 
motionless and shapeless she loomed.

 "He aint awake den?"she said.

 "He wasn't when I looked in,"Mrs Compson said."But it's past histime.
He never does sleep after half pastseven. You know he doesn't."

Dilsey saidnothing. She made no further move, but though she couldnot see her save as ablobby shape without depth, Mrs Compson knew that 
she had lowered her face a little and that she stood now like cows do in the 
rain, holding the empty water bottle by itsneck.

 "You're not the one who has tobear it," Mrs Compson said. "It's not 
your responsibility. You can go away. You dont have to bear the brunt of itday in and day out. You owe nothing to them, to Mr Compson's memory. Iknow you have never had any tenderness for Jason. You've never tried to 
conceal it."

Dilsey saidnothing. She turnedslowly and descended, lowering her 
body from step to step, as asmall child does, her hand against the wall.
"You go on and let him alone,"she said. "Dont go in dar nomo, now.I'llsend Luster up soon as I find him.Let him alone,now."

 She returned to the kitchen. She looked into the stove, then she drewher apron over her head and donned the overcoat and opened the outerdoor and looked up and down the yard. The weather drove upon her flesh, 
harsh and minute,but the scene was empty of all else thatmoved. She 
descended the steps, gingerly, as if for silence, and wentaround the corner 
of the kitchen.As she did so Luster emerged quickly and innocently from 
the cellar door.

Dilsey stopped. "Whut youup to?" she said.

 "Nothin," Luster said. "MrJason sayfer me to find out whar dat water 
leak in de cellar fum."

 "En when wus hit he sayfer you to do dat?" Dilsey said. "Last New 
Year's day, wasn't hit?" 


 "I thought Ijes be lookin whiles dey sleep," Luster said. Dilsey went to 
the cellar door. He stood aside and she peered down into the obscurity 
odorous of dank earth and mold and rubber.

 "Huh," Dilsey said. She lookedat Luster again.He met her gaze blandly, 
innocent and open. "I dont know whut you up to,but you aint got no 
business coin hit. You jes tryin me too dis mawnin cause de others is, aintyou? You git on up dar en see to Benjy, you hear?"

 "Yessum," Luster said. He wenton toward the kitchen steps, swiftly.

 "Here," Dilsey said."You git me another armful of wood while I got 
you."

 "Yessum," he said. He passed her on the steps and went to the woodpile.
When he blundered again at the door a moment later, again invisible and 
blind within and beyond his wooden avatar, Dilsey opened the door and 
guided him across the kitchen with a firm hand.

 "Jes thow hitat dat box again,"she said. "Jes thow hit."

 "I got to," Luster said, panting."I cant put hit down no other way."

 "Den youstand dar en hold hita while," Dilsey said. She unloaded him a 
stick at a time. "Whut gotinto youdis mawnin? Here I vent you fer wood 
en youaint never brought mo'n six sticks at a time to save yo life swelltoday. Whut you fixin to ax me kin you do now? Aint datshow lef town 
yit?"

 "Yessum.Hit done gone."

 She put the last stick into the box. "Now you go on up dar wid Benjy, like 
I tole you befo," she said. "And I dont wantnobody else yellin down dem 
stairs at me swell I rings de bell. You hear me."

 "Yessum," Luster said. He vanished through the swing door. Dilsey put 
some more wood in the stove andreturned to the bread board. Presentlyshe began to sing again.

 The room grew warmer. Soon Dilsey's skin had taken on a rich, lustrous 
qualityas compared with thatas of a faint dusting of wood ashes which 
both itand Luster's hadworn as she moved about the kitchen, gatheringabout her the raw materials of food, coordinating the meal. On the wallabove a cupboard, invisible save at night,by lamp light and even then 
evincing an enigmatic profunditybecause it had but one hand, a cabinet 
clock ticked, then with a preliminary sound as ifit had cleared its throat, 


struck five times.

 "Eight oclock," Dilsey said.She ceased and tilted her head upward, 
listening. But there was no soundsave the clock and the fire. She opened 
the oven and looked at the pan ofbread, then stooping she paused whilesomeone descended the stairs. She heard the feet cross the diningroom, 
then the swing door opened and Luster entered, followed by a bigman who 
appeared to have been shaped of some substance whose particles wouldnot or did not cohere to one another or to the frame which supported it. 
His skin was dead lookingand hairless; dropsical too, he moved with a 
shambling gait like a trained bear. His hair was pale and fine. It had been 
brushed smoothly down upon hisbrow like that of children in 
daguerrotypes. His eyes were clear, of the pale sweet blue of cornflowers, 
his thickmouth hung open, drooling a little.

 "Is he cold?" Dilsey said. She wiped her hands on her apron and touched 
his hand.

 "Ef he aint, Iis," Luster said."Always cold Easter. Aint never seen hitfail. Miss Cahline say efyouaint got time to fix her hot water bottle to 
never mind about hit." "Oh, Lawd," Dilsey said. She drew a chair into the 
corner between the woodbox and the stove. The man went obediently and 
sat in it."Look in de dinin room and see whar I laid dat bottle down," 
Dilsey said. Luster fetched the bottle from the diningroom and Dilsey filledit and gave it to him."Hurry up,now," she said. "See ef Jason wake now. 
Tell em hit's all ready."

 Luster went out. Ben sat beside the stove. He sat loosely, utterlymotionless save for his head, which made a continualbobbing sort of 
movement as he watched Dilsey with his sweet vague gaze as she moved 
about. Luster returned.

 "He up," he said. "Miss Cahline say put hit on de table."He came to the 
stove and spread his hands palm down above the firebox."He up, too," he 
said. "Gwine hit wid bofe feet dismawnin."

 "Whut's de matter now?" Dilsey said. "Gitaway fum dar.How kin I do 
anything wid you standin over de stove?"

 "I cold," Luster said.

 "You ought to thought about dat whiles you was down dar in dat cellar," 
Dilsey said. "Whut de matter wid Jason?" 


 "Sayin me en Benjybroke dat winder in his room."

 "Is dey one broke?" Dilsey said.

 "Dat's whut he sayin," Luster said. "Say I broke hit."

 "How could you, when he keephit locked all day en night?"

 "Say Ibroke hit chunkin rocks at hit," Luster said.

 "En did you?"

 "Nome," Luster said.

 "Dont lie to me,boy," Dilsey said.

 "I never done hit," Luster said. "Ask Benjy ef I did. I aintstud'in dat 
winder."

 "Who could a broke hit, den?" Dilsey said. "He jes tryin hisself, to wake 
Quentin up," she said, taking the pan ofbiscuits out of the stove.

 "Reckin so," Luster said. "Dese funny folks. Glad I aint none of em."

 "Aint none of who?" Dilsey said. "Lemme tell you somethin,nigger boy, 
you got jes es much Compson devilment in you esany of em. Is you right 
sho younever broke dat window?"

 "Whut I want to breakhit fur?"

 "Whut you do any of yo devilment fur?" Dilseysaid."Watch him now, so 
he cant burn his hand again swell I git de table set."

 She went to the diningroom, where they heard her moving about, then 
she returned and set a plate at the kitchen table and set food there. Ben 
watched her, slobbering,makinga faint, eager sound.

 "All right, honey," she said. "Here yo breakfast.Bring his chair, Luster." 
Luster moved the chair up and Ben sat down, whimpering and slobbering. 
Dilsey tied a cloth abouthisneck and wiped his mouth with the end of it. 
"And see kin you keep fum messin up his clothes one time," she said, 
handing Luster a spoon.

 Ben ceased whimpering.He watched the spoon as it rose to hismouth. 
It was as if even eagerness were musclebound in him too, and hunger itself 
inarticulate,not knowing it is hunger. Luster fed him with skill and 
detachment. Now and then hisattention would return long enough to 
enable him to feint the spoon and cause Ben to close his mouthupon the 
empty air, but it was apparent that Luster's mind was elsewhere. Hisother 
hand lay on the back of the chair and upon that dead surface it moved 
tentatively, delicately, asif he were pickingan inaudible tune out of the 


dead void, and once he even forgot to tease Ben with the spoon while hisfingers teased out of the slain wood a soundless and involved arpeggio untilBen recalled him by whimpering again.

 In the diningroom Dilsey moved back and forth. Presently she rang a 
small clear bell, then in the kitchen Luster heard Mrs Compson and Jason 
descending, and Jason's voice, and he rolled his eyes whitely with 
listening.

 "Sure, I know they didn't breakit," Jason said. "Sure, I know that. 
Maybe the change of weather broke it."

 "I dont see how it could have,"Mrs Compson said."Your room stays 
locked all day long, just asyou leave it when you go to town. None of us 
ever go in there except Sunday, toclean it. I dont want you to think that I 
would go where I'm not wanted, or that I would permit anyone else to."

 "I never said youbroke it, did I?" Jason said.

 "I dont want to goin your room," Mrs Compson said. "I respect 
anybody's private affairs. I wouldn't put my foot over the threshold, even if 
I had a key."

 "Yes," Jason said."I know yourkeys wont fit. That's why I had the lock 
changed. What I want to know is,how that window got broken."

 "Luster say he didn't do hit," Dilsey said.

 "I knew that withoutasking him," Jason said. "Where's Quentin?" he 
said.

 "Where she is ev'y Sunday mawnin," Dilsey said. "Whut got into you de 
last few days, anyhow?"

 "Well, we're going to change all that,"Jason said. "Go upand tell her 
breakfast is ready."

 "You leave her alone now, Jason," Dilsey said. "She gitsup fer breakfast 
ev'y week mawnin, en Miss Cahline lets her stay in bed ev'y Sunday.You 
knows dat."

 "I cant keep a kitchen full ofniggers to wait on her pleasure, much as I'dlike to," Jason said. "Go and tell her to come down to breakfast."

 "Aint nobody have to wait on her," Dilsey said. "I puts her breakfast inde warmer en she--"

 "Did you hear me?" Jason said.

 "I hears you," Dilseysaid."All Ibeen hearin, when youin de house. Ef 


hit aint Quentin er yo maw, hit's Luster en Benjy. Whut you let him go on 
dat way fer, Miss Cahline?"

 "You'd better do as he says," Mrs Compson said."He's head of the house 
now. It's his right to require us to respect his wishes. I try to do it, and if I 
can, you can too."

"'Taintno sense in him bein sobad tempered he got to make Quentin git 
up jes to suit him," Dilsey said."Maybe you thinkshe broke dat window."

 "She would, if she happened to think of it," Jason said. "You go and do 
what I told you."

 "En I wouldn't blame her none ef she did," Dilsey said, going toward the 
stairs. "Wid younaggin at her all de blessed time youin de house."

 "Hush, Dilsey," Mrs Compson said. "It'sneither your place nor mine to 
tell Jason what to do. Sometimes I think he is wrong,but I try to obey his 
wishes for you all's sakes. If I'm strong enough to come to the table,
Quentin can too."

Dilsey went out. They heard her mounting the stairs. They heard her a 
long while on the stairs.

 "You've got a prize set of servants," Jason said.He helped his mother 
and himself to food. "Did you ever have one thatwas worth killing? You 
must have had some before I was big enough to remember."

 "I have to humor them," Mrs Compson said. "I have to depend on them 
so completely. It's not as if I were strong. I wish I were. I wish I coulddo allthe house work myself. I could at least take that much off your shoulders."

 "And a fine pigsty we'd live in, too," Jason said."Hurry up, Dilsey," he 
shouted.

 "I know you blame me," MrsCompson said, "for letting them off to go to 
church today."

 "Gowhere?" Jason said. "Hasn't that damn show left yet?"

 "To church," Mrs Compson said. "The darkies are having aspecialEaster service. I promised Dilsey two weeks ago that they could get off." 
"Which means we'll eat cold dinner," Jason said,"or none at all." 
"I know it's my fault,"Mrs Compson said. "I know you blame me." 
"For what?" Jason said. "You never resurrected Christ, did you?"

 They heard Dilsey mount the final stair, then her slow feet overhead.

 "Quentin," she said. When she called the first time Jason laid his knife 


and fork down and he and hismother appeared to wait across the tablefrom one another inidentical attitudes; the one cold and shrewd, with 
close-thatched brown hair curled into two stubborn hooks, one on either 
side of hisforehead like abartender in caricature, and hazel eyes with 
black-ringed irises like marbles, the other cold and querulous, with 
perfectly white hair and eyes pouched and baffled and so darkas to appear 
to be all pupil or all iris.

 "Quentin," Dilsey said. "Get up,honey. Dey waitin breakfast on you."

 "I cant understand how that window got broken," Mrs Compson said. 
"Are you sure it was done yesterday? It could have been like that a long 
time, with the warm weather. The upper sash,behind the shade like that."

 "I've told you for the last time that it happened yesterday," Jason said. 
"Dont you reckon I know the room I live in? Do you reckon I could have 
lived in ita week with a hole in the window you could stick your hand...." 
his voice ceased, ebbed, left him staringat hismother with eyes that for an 
instant were quite empty ofanything. It was as though his eyes were 
holding theirbreath, while his mother looked at him, her face flaccidand 
querulous,interminable, clairvoyant yet obtuse. As they sat so Dilsey said,

 "Quentin. Dont play wid me, honey. Come on tobreakfast, honey.Dey 
waitin fer you."

 "I cant understandit," Mrs Compson said. "It's justas ifsomebody had 
tried to break into the house--" Jason sprang up.His chair crashed over 
backward. "What--" Mrs Compson said, staring athim as he ran pasther 
and went jumpingup the stairs, where he met Dilsey. His face was now inshadow, and Dilsey said,

 "She sullin. Yo maw aintunlocked--" ButJason ran on past her and 
along the corridor to a door. He didn't call. He grasped the knobandtriedit, then he stood with the knob in his hand and his head benta little, as ifhe were listening to something much further awaythan the dimensioned 
room beyond the door, and which he already heard. His attitude was that 
of one who goes through the motions of listeningin order to deceive 
himselfas to what he already hears. Behind him Mrs Compson mounted 
the stairs, calling his name. Then she saw Dilsey and she quit calling himand began to call Dilsey instead.

 "I told you she aintunlocked dat do yit," Dilseysaid. 


 When she spoke he turned and ran toward her, but his voice was quiet, 
matter of fact. "She carry the keywith her?" he said. "Has she got itnow, I 
mean, or will she have--"

 "Dilsey,"Mrs Compson said on the stairs.

 "Is which?" Dilsey said. "Whyn't you let--"

 "The key," Jason said."To that room. Does she carry it with her allthe 
time. Mother." Then he saw Mrs Compson and he went down the stairs and 
met her. "Give me the key," he said. He fell to pawingat the pockets of the 
rusty black dressing sacque she wore. She resisted.

 "Jason," she said. "Jason! Are you and Dilsey trying to putme to bed 
again?" she said, trying tofend him off. "Cant you even let me have Sunday 
in peace?"

 "The key," Jason said, pawingat her. "Give it here."He looked back at 
the door, as if he expected it to fly open before he could get back toitwith 
the key he did not yet have.

 "You, Dilsey!" Mrs Compson said, clutching her sacque about her.

 "Give me the key, you old fool!"Jason cried suddenly. From her pockethe tugged a huge bunch of rusted keys on an iron ring like a mediaevaljailer's and ran backup the hall with the two women behind him.

 "You, Jason!" Mrs Compson said. "He will never find the right one," she 
said. "You know I never let anyone take my keys, Dilsey," she said.She 
began to wail.

 "Hush," Dilsey said. "He aint gwine do nothin to her. I aint gwinelethim."

 "But on Sunday morning, in my own house," Mrs Compson said. "When 
I've tried so hard to raise them christians. Let me find the right key,Jason," 
she said. She put her hand on his arm. Then she began to struggle with 
him,but he flung her aside witha motion of his elbow and looked around 
at her for a moment, his eyes cold and harried, then he turned to the door 
again and the unwieldy keys.

 "Hush," Dilsey said. "You, Jason!"

 "Something terrible has happened," Mrs Compson said, wailing again. "I 
know it has. You, Jason," she said,graspingat him again. "He wont even 
let me find the key to a room in my own house!"

 "Now, now," Dilsey said. "Whut kin happen? I righthere. I aint gwine let 


him hurt her. Quentin," she said, raising her voice, "dont yoube skeered, 
honey, I'se right here."

 The door opened, swung inward. He stood init for a moment, hiding the 
room, then he stepped aside. "Go in," he said in a thick, light voice. They 
went in. It was nota girl's room. It was not anybody's room, and the faintscent of cheap cosmetics and the few feminine objects and the other 
evidences of crude and hopeless efforts to feminise itbut added to its 
anonymity, givingit that dead and stereotyped transience of rooms in 
assignation houses. The bed had not been disturbed. On the floor laya 
soiled undergarment of cheap silka little too pink, from a half open bureau 
drawer dangled a single stocking.The window was open. A pear tree grew 
there, close against the house. It was in bloom and the branches scraped 
and rasped against the house and the myriad air, driving in the window, 
broughtinto the room the forlorn scent of the blossoms.

 "Dar now," Dilsey said. "Didn'tI told you she all right?"

 "All right?" Mrs Compson said. Dilsey followed her into the room and 
touched her.

 "You come on and lay down, now," she said. "I find her in ten minutes."

 Mrs Compson shook her off. "Find the note," she said."Quentin left a 
note when he did it."

 "All right," Dilsey said. "I'll findhit. You come on to yo room,now."

 "I knew the minute they named her Quentin this would happen,"Mrs 
Compson said.She went to the bureau and began to turn over the scattered 
objects there--scent bottles,a boxof powder, a chewed pencil, a pairof 
scissors with one broken blade lying upon a darned scarf dusted with 
powder and stained with rouge. "Find the note," she said.

 "I is," Dilsey said. "You come on, now. Me andJason'll find hit. You 
come on to yo room."

 "Jason," Mrs Compson said. "Where is he?" She went to the door.Dilsey 
followed her on down the hall, to another door. It was closed. "Jason," she 
called through the door. There was no answer. She tried the knob, then she 
called him again.But there was still no answer, for he was hurling things 
backward out of the closet, garments, shoes,a suitcase. Then he emerged 
carrying a sawn section of tongue-and-groove planking and laid it down 
and entered the closet again and emerged with a metal box.He set iton the 


bed and stood lookingat the broken lock while he dug akeyringfrom hispocket and selected a key, and for a time longer he stood with the selected 
key in his hand, lookingat the broken lock. Then he put the keys back inhis pocket and carefully tilted the contents of the box out upon the bed. 
Still carefullyhe sorted the papers, taking them up one at a time and 
shaking them. Then he upended the box and shookit too and slowlyreplaced the papers and stood again, looking at the broken lock, withthe 
box in his hands and hishead bent. Outside the window he heard some 
jaybirds swirl shrieking past and away, their cries whipping away along the 
wind, and an automobile passed somewhere and died away also.Hismother spoke hisname again beyond the door, but he didn't move.He 
heard Dilsey lead her away up the hall, and then a door closed. Then he 
replaced the box in the closet and flung the garmentsbackintoit and went 
down stairs to the telephone. While he stood there with the receiver to his 
ear waiting Dilsey came down the stairs.She looked at him, without 
stopping,and went on.

 The wire opened. "This is Jason Compson," he said, his voice so harsh 
and thick that he had to repeat himself. "Jason Compson," he said, 
controlling his voice. "Have a car ready, with a deputy,if you cant go,in ten 
minutes. I'll be there-- What?-- Robbery. My house. I know who itRobbery, I say.Have a car read-- What?? Aren't you a paid law 
enforcement-- Yes, I'll be there in five minutes.Have that car ready to 
leave at once. If you dont, I'll report it to the governor."

 He clapped the receiver back and crossed the diningroom, where the 
scarce broken meal lay cold now on the table, and entered the kitchen. 
Dilsey was filling the hot water bottle. Ben sat, tranquiland empty.Beside 
him Luster looked like a fice dog, brightly watchful.He was eatingsomething. Jason went on across the kitchen.

 "Aint you going to eat nobreakfast?"Dilsey said. He paid her no 
attention. "Go on en eat yobreakfast, Jason." He went on. The outer door 
banged behind him. Luster rose and went to the window and looked out.

 "Whoo," he said. "Whut happenin up dar? He been beatin Miss 
Quentin?"

"You hush yo mouf," Dilseysaid. "You gitBenjy started now en Ibeat yo 
head off. Youkeep him quiet es you kin swell I gitback,now."She screwed 


the cap on the bottle and went out. They heard her go up the stairs, then 
they heard Jason pass the house in his car. Then there was no sound in the 
kitchen save the simmering murmur of the kettle and the clock.

 "You know whut Ibet?" Luster said. "Ibet he beather. I bet he knock 
her in de head en now he gone fer de doctor. Dat's whut I bet." The clock 
tick-tocked, solemn and profound. It might have been the dry pulse of the 
decaying house itself,after a whileit whirred and cleared its throat and 
struck six times.Ben looked upat it, then he looked at the bulletlike 
silhouette of Luster's head in the window and he begun tobob his head 
again, drooling. He whimpered.

 "Hush up, looney," Luster said without turning."Look like we aint 
"gwine git to go to no church today." But Ben sat in the chair, hisbig soft 
hands danglingbetween his knees, moaningfaintly.Suddenly he wept, a 
slow bellowing sound, meaningless and sustained. "Hush," Luster said. He 
turned and lifted his hand. "You want me to whup you?" But Ben looked at 
him,bellowing slowly with each expiration. Luster came and shook him. 
"You hush dis minute!" he shouted. "Here," he said. He hauled Ben out of 
the chair and dragged the chair around facing the stove and openedthe 
door to the firebox and shoved Ben into the chair. They looked like a tug 
nudgingat a clumsy tanker in a narrowdock. Ben sat down again facingthe rosy door. He hushed. Then they heard the clock again,and Dilsey slow 
on the stairs. When she entered he began to whimper again. Then he lifted 
his voice.

 "Whut you done to him?" Dilsey said. "Why cantyou let him lone dis 
mawnin, of all times?"

 "I aint doin nothin to him," Luster said. "Mr Jason skeered him, dat'swhut hitis.He aint kilt MissQuentin,is he?"

 "Hush, Benjy," Dilsey said. He hushed. She went to the window and 
looked out. "Isit quit rainin?" she said.

 "Yessum," Luster said. "Quit long time ago."

 "Den y'all go out do's a while," she said. "Ijes got Miss Cahline quietnow."

 "Is we gwine to church?" Luster said.

 "I let you know bout dat when de time come. You keep him away fum de 
house swell I calls you." 


 "Kin we go to de pastuh?" Luster said.

 "All right. Only you keep him away fum de house. I done stood allIkin."

 "Yessum," Luster said. "Whar Mr Jason gone, mammy?"

 "Dat's some mo of yo business,aint it?" Dilsey said. She began toclear 
the table. "Hush, Benjy. Luster gwine take you out to play."

 "Whut he done to Miss Quentin, mammy?" Luster said.

 "Aint done nothin to her. You all git on outen here."

 "I bet she aint here," Luster said.

Dilsey looked at him."How youknow she aint here?"

 "Me and Benjy seed her clamb out de window lastnight. Didn't us, 
Benjy?"

 "You did?" Dilsey said, lookingat him.

 "We sees her doin hit ev'y night," Luster said. "Clamb right down dat 
pear tree."

 "Dont you lie to me, nigger boy," Dilsey said.

 "I aint lyin. AskBenjy ef I is."

 "Whyn't you say somethin about it, den?"

"'Twarn't none o mybusiness,"Luster said. "Iaint gwine git mixed up inwhite folks' business.Come on here, Benjy, les go out do's."

 They went out. Dilsey stood fora while at the table, then she wentand 
cleared the breakfast things from the diningroom and ate her breakfast and 
cleaned up the kitchen. Then she removed her apron and hung itupand 
went to the foot of the stairs and listened for a moment. There was nosound. She donned the overcoat and the hat and went across to her cabin.

 The rain had stopped. The air now drove out of the southeast,broken 
overhead into blue patches. Upon the crest of a hill beyond the trees and 
roofs and spires of town sunlight lay like a pale scrap of cloth, was blotted 
away. Upon the air a bell came, then as if at a signal, other bells took up the 
sound and repeated it.

 The cabin door opened and Dilsey emerged, again in the maroon cape 
and the purple gown, and wearingsoiled white elbow-length gloves and 
minus her headcloth now.She came into the yard and called Luster. She 
waited a while, then she went to the house and around it to the cellar door, 
moving close to the wall, and looked into the door. Ben sat on the steps. 


Before him Luster squatted on the damp floor. He held a saw in his left 
hand, the blade sprunga little by pressure of his hand, and he was in the 
act of striking the blade with the worn wooden mallet with which she had 
been making beaten biscuit for more than thirty years. The saw gave forth 
a single sluggish twang that ceased with lifeless alacrity, leaving the blade 
in a thin clean curve between Luster's hand and the floor. Still, inscrutable,
it bellied.

 "Dat's de way he done hit," Luster said. "I jesaint foun de right thing to 
hit it wid."

 "Dat's whut you doin, isit?" Dilsey said. "Bring me datmallet," she 
said.

 "I aint hurt hit," Luster said.

 "Bringhit here," Dilsey said. "Put dat saw whar you got hit first."

 He put the saw away and brought the mallet to her. Then Ben wailed 
again, hopeless and prolonged. It was nothing.Just sound. It mighthave 
been all time andinjustice and sorrow become vocal for an instantby a 
conjunction of planets.

 "Listen at him," Luster said. "He been gwine on dat way ev'y since you 
vent us outen de house. I dont know whut got in to him dis mawnin."

 "Bringhim here," Dilsey said.

 "Come on, Benjy," Luster said.He went back down the steps and took 
Ben's arm.He came obediently, wailing, that slow hoarse sound that ships 
make, that seems tobegin before the sounditself has started, seems to 
cease before the sounditself has stopped.

 "Run and git his cap," Dilsey said. "Dont make nonoise Miss Cahline kinhear. Hurry,now. We already late."

 "She gwine hear him anyhow, ef you dont stop him," Luster said.

 "He stop when we git off de place," Dilsey said. "He smellin hit. Dat'swhut hitis."

 "Smell whut,mammy?" Luster said.

 "You go git dat cap," Dilsey said. Luster went on. They stood in the cellar 
door, Ben one step below her. The sky wasbroken now into scuddingpatches that dragged their swift shadows up out of the shabby garden, overthe broken fence and across the yard. Dilsey stroked Ben's head, slowly and 
steadily, smoothing the bangupon his brow.He wailed quietly, 


unhurriedly. "Hush," Dilsey said. "Hush, now. We be gone in a minute. 
Hush, now." He wailed quietly and steadily.

 Luster returned, wearing a stiffnew straw hat witha colored bandand 
carrying a cloth cap. The hat seemed to isolate Luster's skull, in the 
beholder's eye as a spotlight would, in allits individual planes and angles. 
So peculiarlyindividual was its shape that at first glance the hatappeared 
to be on the head of someone standing immediatelybehind Luster. Dilsey 
looked at the hat.

 "Whyn't you wear yo old hat?" she said.

 "Couldn't find hit," Luster said.

 "I bet you couldn't. I bet you fixed hit last night so you couldn't find hit. 
You fixin to ruin datun."

 "Aw, mammy," Luster said."Hit aint gwine rain."

 "Howyou know? You go git datold hat en put datnew un away."

 "Aw, mammy."

 "Den you go git de umbreller."

 "Aw, mammy."

 "Take yo choice," Dilsey said. "Git yo old hat, er de umbreller. I dont 
keer which."

 Luster went to the cabin. Ben wailed quietly.

 "Come on," Dilsey said."Dey kin ketch up widus. We "wine to hear de 
singin." They went around the house, toward the gate. "Hush," Dilsey saidfrom time to time as they went down the drive. They reached the gate. 
Dilsey opened it. Luster was coming down the drive behind them, carryingthe umbrella. A woman was withhim. "Here dey come," Dilsey said. They 
passed out the gate. "Now, den," she said. Ben ceased. Luster and hismother overtook them. Frony wore a dress of brightblue silk and a 
flowered hat. She was a thin woman, with aflat, pleasant face.

 "You got six weeks' work right dar on yo back," Dilsey said. "Whutyou 
gwine do ef hit rain?"

 "Git wet, I reckon," Frony said."I aintnever stopped no rain yit."

 "Mammy always talkin bouthitgwine rain," Luster said.

 "Ef I dont worry bout y'all, I dont know who is," Dilsey said. "Come on, 
we already late."

 "Rev'un Shegog gwine preach today," Fronysaid. 


 "Is?" Dilsey said. "Who him?"

 "He fum Saint Looey," Frony said. "Datbig preacher."

 "Huh," Dilsey said. "Whut dey needs is a man kin put de fear ofGod into 
dese here triflin young niggers."

 "Rev'un Shegog kin do dat," Frony said. "So dey tells."

 They went on along the street.Along its quiet length white people in 
bright clumps moved churchward, under the windybells, walkingnow and 
then in the random and tentative sun. The wind was gusty, out of the 
southeast, chill and raw after the warm days.

 "I wish you wouldn't keep on bringin him to church, mammy," Frony 
said. "Folks talkin."

 "Whut folks?" Dilsey said.

 "I hears em," Frony said.

 "And I knows whutkind of folks," Dilsey said. "Trash white folks.Dat'swho it is. Thinks he aint good enough fer white church,butnigger church 
aint good enough fer him."

 "Dey talks, jes de same," Fronysaid.

 "Den yousend um to me," Dilsey said. "Tell um de good Lawd dont keer 
whether he bright er not. Dontnobody but white trash keer dat."

 A street turned off at right angles, descending, and became a dirt road. 
On either hand the land dropped more sharply; a broad flat dotted with 
small cabins whose weathered roofs were on a level with the crown of the 
road. They were set in small grassless plots littered with broken things, 
bricks, planks, crockery, things ofa once utilitarian value. What growth 
there was consisted of rank weeds and the trees were mulberries and 
locusts and sycamores--trees thatpartook also of the foul desiccation 
which surrounded the houses; trees whose very burgeoning seemed to be 
the sad and stubborn remnant ofSeptember, as if even spring had passed 
them by, leaving them tofeed upon the rich andunmistakable smellof 
negroes in which they grew.

 From the doors negroes spoke to them as they passed, to Dilsey 
usually:

 "Sis'Gibson! How you dismawnin?""I'm well. Is you well?"

 "I'm right well, I thank you."

 They emerged from the cabins and struggled up the sharing levee to the 


road--men in staid, hard brown orblack, with gold watch chains and now 
and then a stick; young men in cheap violentblues or stripes and 
swaggering hats; women a little stiffly sibilant,and children in garments 
bought second hand of white people, who looked at Ben with the 
covertness of nocturnal animals:

 "I bet you wont go up en tech him."

 "How come I wont?"

 "I bet you wont. I bet you skeered to." "He wonthurt folks. He des a 
looney.""How come a looney wont hurt folks?" "satun wont. I teched 
him."

 "I bet you wont now."

 "Case Miss Dilsey lookin.""Youwont no ways."

 "He dont hurt folks.He des a looney."

 And steadily the older people speaking to Dilsey, though,unless they 
were quite old, Dilsey permitted Frony to respond.

 "Mammy aint feelin well dis mawnin."

 "Dat's too bad. But Rev'un Shegog'll kyo dat. He'll give her de comfort en 
de unburdenin."

 The road rose again, to a scene like a painted backdrop. Notched into a 
cut of red clay crowned with oaks the road appeared to stop short off, like a 
cut ribbon. Beside ita weathered church lifted its crazy steeple like a 
painted church, and the whole scene was asflat and without perspective as 
a painted cardboard set upon the ultimate edge of the flat earth, against the 
windy sunlight of space and Apriland a midmorningfilled with bells. 
Toward the church they thronged with slow sabbath deliberation, the 
women and children went on in, the men stopped outside and talked in 
quiet groupsuntil the bell ceased ringing. Then they too entered.

 The church had been decorated, with sparse flowers from kitchen 
gardens and hedgerows, and with streamers of colored crepe paper. Above 
the pulpit hunga battered Christmas bell, the accordion sort that collapses. 
The pulpit was empty, though the choir was already in place, fanningthemselves althoughit wasnot warm.

 Most of the women were gathered on one side of the room. They were 
talking. Then the bell struck one time and they dispersed to their seats and 
the congregation sat for an instant, expectant. The bell struck again one 


time. The choir rose and began tosingand the congregation turned its 
head as one as sixsmall children--four girls with tight pigtailsboundwith 
small scraps of cloth like butterflies, and two boys with close napped 
heads--entered and marched up the aisle, strung together in aharness of 
white ribbons and flowers, and followed by two men in single file. The 
second man was huge, of a light coffee color, imposing in a frock coat and 
white tie. His head was magisterial and profound, his neck rolled above his 
collar in rich folds. But he wasfamiliar to them,and so the heads were stillreverted when he had passed, andit was notuntil the choir ceased singingthat they realised that the visitingclergyman had already entered, andwhen they saw the man who had preceded their minister enter the pulpit 
still ahead of him an indescribable sound wentup, a sigh, asound of 
astonishment and disappointment.

 The visitor was undersized, in ashabbyalpaca coat.He had a wizened 
black face like a small, aged monkey. And all the while that the choir sang 
again and while the six children rose and sang in thin, frightened, tuneless 
whispers, they watched the insignificant looking man sitting dwarfed and 
countrified by the minister's imposingbulk, with something like 
consternation. They were still looking athim with consternation and 
unbelief when the minister rose and introduced him in rich, rolling tones 
whose very unction served to increase the visitor's insignificance.

 "En dey brung dat all de way fum Saint Looey," Frony whispered.

 "I've knowed de Lawd to use cuiser tools den dat," Dilsey said. "Hush, 
now," she said to Ben. "Dey fixin to singagainin a minute."

 When the visitor rose to speakhe sounded like a white man. His voice 
was level and cold. It sounded too big to have come from him and they 
listened at first through curiosity,as they would have to amonkey talking. 
They began to watch him as they would a man on a tight rope. They even 
forgot his insignificantappearancein the virtuosity with which he ran and 
poised and swooped upon the cold inflectionless wire of his voice, sothat at 
last, when witha sort of swoopingglide he came to rest again beside the 
reading desk with one arm resting upon it at shoulder height and hismonkeybody as reft ofall motion as a mummy or an emptied vessel, the 
congregation sighed asifit waked from a collective dream and moved a 
little in its seats.Behind the pulpit the choir fanned steadily. Dilsey 


whispered, "Hush, now. Dey fixin to singin a minute."

 Then a voice said, "Brethren."

 The preacher had not moved. His arm layyet across the desk, andhe 
still held that pose while the voice died in sonorous echoes between the 
walls. It was as different as day and dark from his former tone, witha sad, 
timbrous quality like an alto horn, sinking into their hearts and speakingthere again when it had ceased in fadingand cumulate echoes.

 "Brethren and sisteren,"it said again. The preacher removed his arm 
and he began to walk back and forth before the desk, his hands clasped 
behind him,a meagre figure, hunched over upon itself like that of one long 
immured in striving with the implacable earth, "I got the recollection and 
the blood of the Lamb!"He tramped steadily back and forthbeneath the 
twisted paper and the Christmas bell, hunched, his hands clasped behindhim.He was like a worn small rock whelmed by the successive waves of his 
voice. With hisbody he seemed to feed the voice that, succubus like,had 
fleshed its teeth in him. And the congregation seemed to watch with its 
own eyes while the voice consumed him, until he was nothingand they 
were nothing and there was not even a voice but instead their heartswere 
speaking to one another in chanting measuresbeyond the need for words, 
so that when he came to rest against the reading desk, hismonkey face 
lifted and his whole attitude that of a serene, tortured crucifix that 
transcended its shabbinessand insignificance and made it ofno moment, a 
long moaning expulsion ofbreathrose from them, and a woman's single 
soprano:"Yes, Jesus!"

 As the scudding day passed overhead the dingy windows glowed and 
faded in ghostly retrograde. A car passed along the road outside, laboringin the sand, died away. Dilsey satbolt upright, her hand on Ben's knee. 
Two tears slid down her fallen cheeks, in and out of the myriad 
coruscations ofimmolation and abnegation and time.

 "Brethren," the minister said in a harsh whisper, without moving.

 "Yes, Jesus!" the woman's voice said, hushed yet.

 "Breddren en sistuhn!" His voice rang again, with the horns.He 
removed his arm and stood erect and raisedhis hands."I got de 
ricklickshun en de blood of de Lamb!" They didnot markjust when hisintonation, his pronunciation,became negroid, they just sat swaying a little 


in their seats as the voice took them intoitself.

 "When de long, cold--Oh, I tells you, breddren, when de long, cold.... I 
sees de light en I sees de word, po sinner! Dey passed awayin Egypt,de 
swingin chariots; de generations passed away. Wus a rich man: whar he 
now, O breddren? Wusa po man:whar he now, O sistuhn? Oh I tells you, 
ef you aint got de milk en de dew of de old salvation when de long, cold 
years rolls away!"

 "Yes, Jesus!"

 "I tells you, breddren, en I tells you, sistuhn, dey'll come a time. Po 
sinner sayin Let me lay down wid de Lawd, femme lay down my load. Den 
whut Jesus "wine say, Obreddren? O sistuhn? Is you got de ricklickshun 
en de Blood of de Lamb? Case I aint gwine load down heaven!"

 He fumbled in his coatand took out a handkerchief and mopped hisface. A low concerted sound rose from the congregation: 
"Mmmmmmmmmmmmm!" The woman's voice said, "Yes,Jesus!Jesus!"

 "Breddren! Look at dem little chiller settin dar. Jesus wus like dat once. 
He mammy suffered de glory en de pangs. Sometime maybe she heft himat de nightfall, whilst de angels singin him to sleep; maybe she look out de 
do en see de Roman po-lice passin." He tramped back and forth, moppinghis face. "Listen,breddren! I sees de day. Ma'y settinin de do wid Jesus on 
her lap, de little Jesus. Like dem chiller dar, de little Jesus. I hears de 
angels singin de peaceful songs en de glory; I sees de closin eyes; sees Mary 
jumpup, sees de sojer face: We gwine to kill! We gwine to kill! We gwine to 
kill yo little Jesus! I hears de weepin en de lamentation of de po mammy 
widoutde salvation en de word of God!"

 "Mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm! Jesus! Little Jesus! and another voice, 
rising:

 "I sees, O Jesus! Oh I sees!"and still another, without words, like 
bubbles rising in water.

 "I sees hit, breddren! I sees hit! Sees de blastin,blindin sight! I sees 
Calvary, wid de sacred trees, sees de thief en de murderer en de least of 
dese; I hears de boastin en de braggin:Ef you be Jesus, lifup yo tree en 
walk! I hears de wailin of women en de evenin lamentations; I hearsde 
weepin en de cryin en de turns-away face ofGod: dey done kilt Jesus; dey 
done kilt mySon!" 


 "Mmmmmmmmmmmmm. Jesus! I sees, O Jesus!"

 "O blind sinner! Breddren, I tells you; sistuhn, Isays to you, when de 
Lawd did turn His mighty face, say, Aint"wine overload heaven! I can see 
de widowed God shet His do; I sees de whelmin flood roll between; Isees 
de darkness en de death everlastin upon de generations. Den, lo! Breddren! 
Yes, breddren! Whut I see? Whut I see, O sinner? I sees de resurrection en 
de light; sees de meek Jesus sayin Dey kilt me dat ye shall live again;I dieddat dem whut sees en believes shall never die. Breddren, O breddren! I sees 
de doom crack en de golden horns shoutin down de glory, en de arisen 
dead whut got de blood en de ricklickshun of de Lamb!"

 In the midst of the voices and the hands Ben sat, raptin his sweet blue 
gaze. Dilsey sat boltuprightbeside, crying rigidlyand quietly in the 
annealmentand the blood of the remembered Lamb.

 As they walked through the bright noon, up the sandy road with the 
dispersing congregation talking easily again group to group, she continued 
to weep, unmindful of the talk.

 "He sho a preacher, mon!!He didn't look like much at first, but hush!"

 "He seed de power en de glory."

 "Yes, suh.He seed hit. Face to face he seed hit."

Dilsey made no sound, her face did not quiver as the tears took theirsunken and devious courses, walking with her head up, makingno effort to 
dry them away even.

 "Whyn't you quit dat,mammy?" Frony said. "Wid all dese people lookin.
We be passin white folks soon."

 "I've seed de first en de last," Dilsey said. "Never you mind me."

 "First en last whut?" Frony said.

 "Never you mind," Dilsey said. "I seed de beginnin, en now I sees de 
endin."

 Before they reached the street though she stopped and lifted her skirt 
and dried her eyes on the hem of her topmost underskirt. Then theywent 
on. Ben shambled along beside Dilsey, watching Luster who anticked along 
ahead, the umbrella in his hand and his new straw hat slanted viciously inthe sunlight, like a big foolish dogwatchinga small clever one. They 
reached the gate and entered. Immediately Ben began to whimper again,
and for a while all of them lookedup the drive at the square, paintless 


house withits rotting portico.

 "Whut's gwine on up dar today?" Frony said. "Somethinis."

 "Nothin," Dilsey said. "You tend to yo business en let de whitefolks tend 
to deir'n."

 "Somethinis," Frony said. "I heard him first thing dis mawnin. 'Taintnone ofmy business, dough."

 "En I knows whut, too," Luster said.

 "You knows mo den you got any use fer," Dilseysaid."Aint you jesheard 
Frony say hit aintnone of yo business? You take Benjy on to de backand 
keep him quiet swell I put dinner on."

 "I knows whar MissQuentin is," Luster said.

 "Den jes keep hit," Dilsey said. "Soon esQuentin need any of yo egvice, 
I'll let you know. Y'all g'awn en play in de back, now."

 "You know whut gwine happen soon es dey start playin datball over 
yonder," Luster said.

 "Dey wont start fer a while yit.By dat time T. P.be here to take him 
ridin.Here, you gimme dat new hat."

 Luster gave her the hat and he and Ben went on across the back yard.
Ben was still whimpering, thoughnot loud. Dilsey and Frony went to the 
cabin. After a while Dilsey emerged, again in the faded calico dress, and 
went to the kitchen. The fire had died down. There was no sound in the 
house. She put on the apron and went up stairs. There was no sound 
anywhere. Quentin's room wasas they had left it. She entered and picked 
up the undergarment and put the stockingbackin the drawer and closed it. 
Mrs Compson's door was closed. Dilsey stood beside it for a moment, 
listening. Then she opened it and entered, entered a pervading reek of 
camphor. The shades were drawn, the room in halflight,and the bed, so 
that at first she thought Mrs Compson wasasleep and wasabout to close 
the door when the other spoke.

 "Well?" she said. "Whatis it?"

 "Hit's me," Dilsey said."You want anything?"

 Mrs Compson didn't answer. After a while, without movingher head at 
all, she said:"Where's Jason?"

 "He aint come back yit," Dilseysaid. "Whut you want?"

 Mrs Compson said nothing. Like so many cold, weak people, when faced 


at last by the incontrovertible disaster she exhumed from somewhere a sort 
of fortitude, strength. In her case it was an unshakable conviction 
regarding the yet unplumbed event. "Well," she said presently. "Did you 
findit?"

 "Find whut? Whut you talkin about?"

 "The note. At least she would have enough consideration to leave a note. 
Even Quentin did that."

 "Whut you talkin about?" Dilsey said. "Dont you know she all right? I 
bet she be walkin right in dis do befo dark."

 "Fiddlesticks," Mrs Compson said. "It's in the blood. Like uncle, like 
niece. Or mother. I dont know which would be worse. I dont seem to 
care."

 "Whut you keep on talkin thatway fur?" Dilsey said."Whut she want to 
do anything like that fur?"

 "I dont know. What reason did Quentin have? Under God's heaven what 
reason did he have? It cantbe simply to flout and hurt me. Whoever God 
is, He would not permit that. I'm alady. You might notbelieve that from 
my offspring,but Iam."

 "You des wait en see," Dilsey said. "She be here bynight, right darin her 
bed." Mrs Compson said nothing.The camphor soaked cloth lay upon her 
brow. The black robe lay across the foot of the bed. Dilsey stood with her 
hand on the door knob.

 "Well," Mrs Compson said. "What do you want? Are you going to fixsome dinner for Jason and Benjamin, ornot?"

 "Jason aint come yit," Dilsey said. "I gwine fix somethin. You sho you 
dont wantnothin? Yobottle still hot enough?"

 "You might hand me mybible."

 "I give hit to you dis mawnin,befo I left."

 "You laid it on the edge of the bed. How long did you expect it to stay 
there?"

Dilsey crossed to the bed and groped among the shadowsbeneaththe 
edge of it and found the bible, face down. She smoothed the bent pages and 
laid the book on the bed again. Mrs Compson didn't open her eyes. Her 
hair and the pillow were the same color, beneath the wimple of the 
medicated cloth she looked like an old nun praying. "Dont put it there 


again," she said, without openingher eyes. "That's where you put itbefore. 
Do you want me to have to get outof bed to pick itup?"

Dilsey reached the book acrossher and laid it on the broad side of the 
bed. "You cant see to read, noways," she said. "You wantme to raise de 
shade a little?"

 "No. Let them alone. Go on and fixJason something to eat."

Dilsey went out.She closed the door and returned to the kitchen.The 
stove was almost cold. While she stood there the clock above the cupboard 
struck ten times. "One oclock," she said aloud. "Jason aint comin home. Ise 
seed de first en de last," she said, looking at the cold stove. "Iseed de first 
en de last." She set out some cold food on a table. As she moved backand 
forth she sang, a hymn.She sang the first two lines over and over to the 
complete tune. She arranged the meal and went to the door and calledLuster, and after a time Luster and Ben entered. Ben was still moaning a 
little, as to himself.

 "He aintnever quit," Luster said.

 "Y'all come on en eat," Dilsey said. "Jason aint comin to dinner." They 
sat down at the table. Ben could manage solid food pretty well for himself, 
though even now, with cold food before him, Dilsey tied a cloth about hisneck. He and Luster ate. Dilsey moved about the kitchen, singing the two 
lines of the hymn which she remembered. "Y'all kin g'awn en eat," she said. 
"Jason aint comin home."

 He was twenty milesaway at that time. When he left the house he drove 
rapidly to town, overreaching the slow sabbath groups and the peremptory 
bells along the broken air.He crossed the empty square and turned into a 
narrow street that was abruptly quieter even yet, and stopped before a 
frame house and wentup the flower bordered walk to the porch.

 Beyond the screen door people were talking. As he lifted his handto 
knock he heard steps, so he withheld his hand until abigman in black 
broadcloth trousers and a stiffbosomed white shirt without collar opened 
the door. He had vigorousuntidy iron-gray hair and his gray eyes were 
round and shiny like a little boy's. He took Jason's hand and drew him into 
the house, still shakingit.

 "Come right in,"he said."Come right in."

 "You ready to go now?" Jason said. 


 "Walk rightin," the other said,propelling him by the elbowintoa room 
where a man and a woman sat. "You know Myrtle's husband, dont you? 
Jason Compson,Vernon."

 "Yes," Jason said.He did not even look at the man, and as the sheriff 
drew a chair across the room the man said,

 "We'll go out so you can talk.Come on, Myrtle."

 "No, no," the sheriff said. "You folks keep your seat. I reckon itaint that 
serious,Jason? Have a seat."

 "I'll tell you as we go along," Jason said. "Get your hatand coat."

 "We'll go out," the man said, rising.

 "Keep your seat," the sheriff said. "Me and Jason will go out on the 
porch."

 "You get your hat and coat,"Jason said. "They've already got a twelve 
hour start." The sheriff led the way back to the porch. A man and a woman 
passing spoke to him.He responded with a hearty florid gesture. Bells were 
still ringing,from the direction of the section known as Nigger Hollow. 
"Get your hat,Sheriff," Jason said. The sheriff drew up two chairs.

 "Have a seat and tell me what the trouble is."

 "I told you over the phone," Jason said, standing."I did that to save 
time. Am Igoing to have to go to law to compel you to do your sworn 
duty?"

 "You sit down and tell me aboutit," the sheriff said. "I'll take care of you 
all right."

 "Care, hell," Jason said."Is thiswhat you call taking care of me?"

 "You're the one that's holding us up," the sheriff said. "You sit down and 
tell me aboutit."

 Jason told him, his sense of injury and impotence feeding upon its own 
sound, so that after a time he forgot his haste in the violent cumulation of 
his self justification and his outrage. The sheriff watched him steadily with 
his cold shiny eyes.

 "But you dontknow they done it," he said."Youjust think so."

 "Dont know?"Jason said. "When I spent two damn days chasing her 
through alleys, trying to keep her away from him, after I told her what I'ddo to her if I ever caught her with him, and you say I dont know thatthat 
little b--" 


 "Now, then," the sheriff said. "That'll do. That's enough of that." He 
looked out across the street, his hands in his pockets.

 "And when I come to you, a commissioned officer of the law,"Jason 
said.

 "That show's in Mottson this week," the sheriffsaid.

 "Yes," Jason said."And if I could find a law officer that gave asolitary 
damn about protecting the people that elected him to office, I'd be there 
too by now."He repeated his story, harshly recapitulant, seeming toget an 
actual pleasure out of his outrage and impotence. The sheriff did not 
appear to be listening at all.

 "Jason," he said."What were you doing with three thousand dollars hidin the house?"

 "What?"Jason said. "That's mybusiness where I keep my money.Your 
business is to help me get itback."

 "Did your mother know you had that much on the place?"

 "Look here," Jason said. "My house hasbeen robbed. I know who did itand I know where they are. I come to you as the commissioned officer of 
the law, and I ask you once more, are you going to make any effort to 
recover my property, or not?"

 "Whatdo youaim to do with that girl, if you catch them?"

 "Nothing," Jason said. "Not anything. I wouldn't lay my hand on her. 
The bitch that cost me ajob, the one chance 1 ever had to get ahead,that 
killed my father and is shorteningmy mother's life every day and made my 
name a laughing stock in the town. I wont do anything to her," he said. 
"Not anything."

 "You drove that girl into running off, Jason," the sheriff said.

 "How I conduct my family is nobusiness of yours,"Jason said. "Are you 
going to help me or not?"

 "You drove her away from home," the sheriff said. "And I have some 
suspicions about who that moneybelongs to that I dont reckon I'll ever 
know for certain."

 Jason stood, slowly wringing the brim of his hatin his hands.He said 
quietly: "You're not going to make any effort to catch them for me?"

 "That's not any ofmy business, Jason. If you hadanyactual proof, I'dhave to act. But without that I dont figger it's any of mybusiness." 


 "That's your answer, is it?" Jason said. "Think well, now."

 "That's it, Jason."

 "All right,"Jason said. He put his hat on. "You'll regret this. I wont be 
helpless. This isnot Russia, where justbecause he wears a little metalbadge, a man is immune to law." He went down the steps and got in his car 
and started the engine. The sheriff watched him drive away, turn, and rush 
past the house toward town.

 The bells were ringing again, high in the scudding sunlightin bright 
disorderly tattersof sound.He stopped at a filling station and had his tires 
examined and the tank filled.

 "Gwine on a trip, is you?" the negro asked him. He didn't answer."Look 
like hit gwine fair off,after all," the negro said.

 "Fair off,hell," Jason said. "It'll be raining like hell by twelve oclock." He 
looked at the sky, thinkingabout rain, about the slick clay roads, himself 
stalled somewhere miles from town. He thought about it with a sortof 
triumph, of the fact that he was going to miss dinner,that by starting now 
and so serving his compulsion of haste, he would be at the greatest possibledistance from both towns when noon came. It seemed to him that in this 
circumstance was giving him abreak, so he said to the negro:

 "What the hell are you doing? Has somebody paid you to keep thiscar 
standing here as long as you can?"

 "Dis here ti' aint got noair a-tallin hit," the negro said.

 "Then get the hell away from there and let me have that tube," Jason 
said.

 "Hitupnow," the negro said, rising."You kin ride now."

 Jason gotin and started the engine and drove off. He went into second 
gear, the engine splutteringand gasping,and he raced the engine,jamming 
the throttle down and snapping the choker in and out savagely. "It'sgoingto rain," he said. "Get me half way there, and rain like hell." And he drove 
on out of the bells and out of town, thinking of himself slogging through 
the mud, hunting a team. "And every damn one of them will be at church." 
He thought of how he'd find a church at last and take a team and of the 
owner coming out, shouting at him and of himselfstriking the man down. 
"I'm Jason Compson. See if you can stop me. See if you can elect a man tooffice that can stop me," he said, thinking ofhimself entering the 


courthouse witha file of soldiers and dragging the sheriff out. "Thinks he 
can sit with his hands folded and see me lose my job. I'll show him about 
jobs." Of his niece he did not think at all, nor of the arbitrary valuation of 
the money. Neither of them had had entity or individuality for him for ten 
years; together they merely symbolised the jobin the bank of whichhe had 
been deprived before he ever got it.

 The air brightened, the running shadow patches were now the obverse, 
and it seemed to him that the fact that the day was clearing was another 
cunning stroke on the part of the foe, the fresh battle toward which he was 
carrying ancient wounds. From time to time he passed churches, 
unpainted frame buildings with sheet iron steeples, surrounded by 
tethered teams and shabbymotorcars, and itseemed to him that each of 
them was a picket-post where the rear guards of Circumstance peeped 
fleetinglyback athim."And damn You, too,"he said."See if You can stop 
me," thinking of himself, his file of soldiers with the manacled sheriffin the 
rear, dragging Omnipotence down from his throne, ifnecessary; of the 
embattled legions of both hell andheaven through which he tore hisway 
and put his hands at last on hisfleeing niece.

 The wind was out of the southeast. It blew steadilyupon his cheek. It 
seemed that he could feel the prolonged blow of it sinking through hisskull, and suddenly with an old premonition he clapped the brakes on and 
stopped and sat perfectly still. Then he lifted hishand to hisneck and 
began to curse, and sat there, cursing in a harsh whisper. When it was 
necessary for him to drive for any length of time he fortified himselfwith a 
handkerchief soaked in camphor,which he would tie abouthis throat when 
clear of town, thusinhaling the fumes, and he got out and lifted the seat 
cushion on the chance that there mightbe a forgotten one there. He lookedbeneathboth seats and stood again for a while, cursing, seeing himself 
mocked by his own triumphing.He closed his eyes, leaning on the door. He 
could return and get the forgotten camphor, or he could go on. In either 
case, his head wouldbe splitting,but at home he could be sure of findingcamphor on Sunday, while if he went on he could not be sure. Butifhe 
went back, he would be an hour and a half later in reachingMottson. 
"Maybe I can drive slow,"he said."Maybe I can drive slow, thinking of 
something else...." 


 He got in and started. "I'll think of something else," he said, so he 
thoughtabout Lorraine. He imagined himselfin bed with her, only he was 
just lying beside her, pleading with her to help him, then he thought of the 
money again, and that he hadbeen outwitted by a woman,a girl. Ifhe 
could justbelieve it was the man who had robbed him. But to have been 
robbed of that which was to have compensated him for the lost job, which 
he had acquired through somucheffort and risk,by the very symbolof the 
lost jobitself, and worst of all,by a bitch ofa girl. He drove on, shieldinghis face from the steady wind withthe corner of his coat.

 He could see the opposed forces of his destiny and his will drawingswiftly together now, toward a junction that would be irrevocable; he 
became cunning. I cant make ablunder, he told himself.There would be 
just one right thing, without alternatives: he must do that.He believed that 
both of them would know him on sight, while he'd have to trust to seeing 
her first, unless the man still wore the red tie. And the fact that he must 
depend on that red tie seemed to be the sum of the impending disaster; he 
could almost smell it,feel it above the throbbing of hishead.

 He crested the final hill. Smoke lay in the valley, and roofs, a spire or 
two above trees. He drove down the hill and into the town, slowing, tellinghimselfagain of the need for caution, to find where the tent was located 
first. He couldnot see very well now, and he knew thatit was the disaster 
which kept telling him to go directly and get something for his head.At a 
filling station they told him that the tent was notup yet, but that the show 
cars were on a sidingat the station. He drove there.

 Two gaudily painted pullman cars stood on the track. He reconnoitred 
them before he got out.He was trying tobreathe shallowly, so that the 
blood would notbeat soin his skull. He got out and went along the station 
wall, watching the cars. A few garments hung out of the windows, limp and 
crinkled, as though they had been recently laundered. On the earth beside 
the steps of one sat three canvas chairs. But he sawno sign of life atall 
until a man in a dirty apron came to the door and emptied a pan of 
dishwater with abroad gesture, the sunlight glinting on the metal belly of 
the pan, then entered the car again.

 NowI'll have to take him by surprise, before he can warn them, he 
thought. Itnever occurred to him that they might notbe there, in the car. 


That they should not be there, that the whole result should not hinge on 
whether he saw them first or they saw him first, wouldbe opposed to allnature and contrary to the whole rhythm of events.And more than that: he 
must see them first, get the money back, then what they did wouldbe of no 
importance to him, while otherwise the whole world would know that he, 
Jason Compson, had been robbedby Quentin, hisniece, a bitch.

 He reconnoitred again. Then he went to the car and mounted the steps, 
swiftly and quietly,and paused at the door. The galley was dark, rankwith 
stale food. The man was a white blur, singingin a cracked, shaky tenor. An 
old man, he thought, and notas big as I am.He entered the car as the man 
looked up.

 "Hey?" the man said, stopping his song.

 "Where are they?" Jason said. "Quick, now. In the sleeping car?"

 "Where's who?" the man said.

 "Dont lie to me," Jason said.He blundered on in the cluttered 
obscurity.

 "What's that?" the other said."Who you calling a liar?" and when Jason 
grasped his shoulder he exclaimed, "Look out,fellow!"

 "Dont lie," Jason said."Where are they?"

 "Why, youbastard," the man said. Hisarm was frail and thin in Jason's 
grasp. He tried to wrench free, then he turned and fell to scrabblingon the 
littered table behind him.

 "Come on," Jason said."Where are they?"

 "I'll tell you where they are," the man shrieked. "Lemme find mybutcher 
knife."

 "Here," Jason said, trying to hold the other. "I'm just asking you a 
question."

 "You bastard," the other shrieked, scrabbling at the table. Jason tried to 
grasp himin both arms, trying to prison the puny fury of him. The man's 
body felt so old, so frail,yet so fatally single-purposed that for the first timeJason saw clear and unshadowed the disaster toward which he rushed.

 "Quit it!" he said."Here. Here! I'll get out. Give me time, and I'll get 
out."

 "Call me a liar," the other wailed. "Lemme go. Lemme go just one 
minute. I'll show you." 


 Jason glared wildly about, holding the other. Outside it wasnow bright 
and sunny, swift and brightand empty, and he thought of the people soon 
to be going quietly home to Sunday dinner, decorously festive, and of 
himself trying to hold the fatal, furious little old man whom he dared not 
release long enough to turn hisback and run.

 "Will you quit long enough forme to get out?" he said. "Will you?" But 
the other still struggled, and Jason freed one hand and struck him on the 
head. A clumsy, hurried blow, andnot hard, but the other slumped 
immediatelyand slid clattering among pans and buckets to the floor.Jason 
stood above him, panting, listening. Then he turned and ran from the car. 
At the door he restrained himself and descended more slowly and stood 
there again.His breathmade a hah hah hah sound and he stood there 
trying torepress it, dartinghis gaze this way and that, when at a scufflingsound behind him he turned in time to see the little old man leaping 
awkwardly and furiously from the vestibule, a rustyhatchet highin hishand.

 He grasped at the hatchet, feeling no shock but knowing that he was 
falling, thinkingSo this ishow it'll end, and he believed that he was about 
to die and when something crashed against the back of his head he thought 
How did he hit me there? Onlymaybe he hit me a long time ago, he 
thought, And I justnow felt it, and he thoughtHurry. Hurry. Get it over 
with, and then a furious desire not to die seized him and he struggled, 
hearing the old man wailing and cursing in his cracked voice.

 He still struggled when they hauled him tohis feet, but they held himand he ceased.

 "Am I bleeding much?" he said."The back of my head. Am I bleeding?" 
He was still saying that while he felt himselfbeing propelled rapidly away, 
heard the old man's thin furious voice dying away behind him."Look at my 
head," he said. "Wait, I'--"

 "Wait, hell," the man who held him said. "That damn little wasp'll killyou.Keep going. You aint hurt."

 "He hit me," Jason said. "Am Ibleeding?"

 "Keep going," the other said. Heled Jason on around the corner of the 
station, to the empty platform where an express truck stood, where grass 
grew rigidly in a plotbordered with rigid flowers and a sign in electric 


lights:Keep your on Mottson, the gap filled bya human eye with an 
electric pupil. The man released him. 
"Now," he said."You get on outof here and stay out. What were you 
trying to do? commit suicide?" 
"I was looking for two people,"Jason said. "Ijustasked him where they 

were." 
"Who you looking for?" 
"It's a girl," Jason said. "And aman.He had on a red tie in Jefferson 

yesterday. With this show. They robbed me." 
"Oh," the man said. "You're the one, are you. Well, they aint here." 
"I reckon so,"Jason said. He leaned against the wall and put his hand to 

the back of his head and looked athis palm."I thought I wasbleeding," he 
said. "I thoughthe hit me with that hatchet." 
"You hityour head on the rail," the man said. "Youbetter go on. They 

aint here." 
"Yes. He said they were not here. I thought he was lying." 
"Do you think I'm lying?" the man said. 
"No," Jason said."I know they're not here." 
"I told him to get the hell out ofthere, both of them," the man said. "I 

wont have nothing like that in myshow. I run a respectable show, with a 

respectable troupe." 
"Yes," Jason said."You dont know where they went?" 
"No. And I dont want to know. No member of my show can pullastunt 

like that. You her ... brother?" 
"No," Jason said."It dont matter. I just wanted to see them. Yousure he 
didn't hit me? No blood, I mean." 
"There would have been blood if I hadn't got there when I did. You stay 

away from here, now. That little bastard'll kill you. That your car yonder?" 
"Yes." 
"Well, you get init and go back to Jefferson. If youfind them, it wont be 

in myshow. I run a respectable show. You say they robbed you?"

 "No," Jason said."It dont make any difference."He went to the car and 
got in. What isit I must do? he thought. Then he remembered. He started 
the engine and drove slowly up the street until he found a drugstore. The 
door was locked. He stood for a while with his hand on the knob and his 


head bent a little. Then he turned away and when a man came alongafter a 
while he asked if there was a drugstore open anywhere, but there was not.
Then he asked when the northbound train ran, and the man told him at 
two thirty. He crossed the pavement and got in the car again and satthere. 
After a while two negro lads passed. He called to them.

 "Can either of youboys drive a car?" 
"Yes, suh." 
"What'll you charge to drive me to Jefferson right away?" 
They looked at one another, murmuring. 
"I'll pay a dollar," Jason said. 
They murmured again."Couldn't go fer dat," one said."What willyou go 

for?" 
"Kin you go?" one said. 
"I cant git off," the other said. "Whyn't you drive him up dar? Youaint

got nothin to do." 
"Yes I is." 
"Whut you got to do?" 
They murmured again, laughing. 
"I'll give you two dollars," Jason said. "Either of you." "I cant gitaway 

neither," the first said. 
"All right,"Jason said. "Go on." 
He sat there for some time. He heard a clock strike the half hour, then 

people began to pass, in Sunday and easter clothes. Some looked athim as 
they passed, at the man sitting quietly behind the wheel of a small car, with 
his invisible life ravelled out about him like a wornoutsock, and went on. 
After a while a negro in overalls came up.

 "Is you de one wants to go to Jefferson?" he said. 
"Yes," Jason said."What'll youcharge me?" 
"Fo dollars." 
"Give you two." 
"Cant gofer no less'n fo." The man in the car sat quietly. He wasn't even 

looking at him. The negro said, "You want me er not?" 
"All right,"Jason said. "Get in. 
He moved over and the negro took the wheel. Jason closed his eyes. I 

can get something for itat Jefferson, he told himself, easing himself to the 


jolting, I can get something there. They drove on, along the streets where 
people were turning peacefully into houses and Sunday dinners, andon out 
of town. He thought that. He wasn't thinking of home, where Ben and 
Luster were eating cold dinner at the kitchen table. Something--the 
absence of disaster, threat, in anyconstant evil--permitted him to forget 
Jefferson as any place which he had ever seen before, where his life must 
resume itself.

 When Ben and Luster were done Dilsey sent them outdoors. "And see 
kin you let him alone swell fo oclock. T. P. be here den."

 "Yessum," Luster said. They went out. Dilsey ate her dinner and cleared 
up the kitchen. Then she went to the foot of the stairs and listened, but 
there was no sound. She returned through the kitchen and out the outerdoor and stopped on the steps. Ben and Luster were not in sight, but whileshe stood there she heard another sluggish twang from the direction of the 
cellar door and she went to the door and looked down upon a repetition of 
the morning's scene.

 "He done hitjes dat way," Luster said. He contemplated the motionless 
saw with a kind of hopeful dejection. "I aint got de right thing to hitit wid 
yit," he said.

 "En you aint gwine find hit down here, neither," Dilsey said. "Youtake 
him on outin de sun. You bofe get pneumonia down here on dis wet flo."

 She waited and watched them cross the yard toward a clump of cedar 
trees near the fence. Then she went on to her cabin.

 "Now, dont you git started," Luster said. "I had enough trouble wid you 
today." There was a hammock made of barrel staves slatted into woven 
wires. Luster lay down in the swing, butBen went on vaguely and 
purposelessly. He began to whimper again."Hush, now," Luster said. "I 
fixin to whup you."He layback in the swing. Ben had stopped moving, but 
Luster could hear him whimpering. "Is you gwine hush, er aint you?" 
Luster said. He gotup and followed and came upon Ben squattingbefore a 
small mound of earth.At either end of it an emptybottle ofblue glass that 
once contained poison was fixed in the ground. In one was a withered stalkof jimson weed. Ben squatted before it, moaning,a slow, inarticulate 
sound. Still moaning he sought vaguely aboutand found a twig andput itin the other bottle. "Whyn't you hush?" Luster said. "You want me togive 


you somethin tosho noughmoan about? Sposin I does dis."He knelt and 
swept the bottle suddenly upandbehind him.Ben ceased moaning.He 
squatted, looking at the small depression where the bottle had sat, then as 
he drew his lungs full Luster brought the bottle backinto view. "Hush!" he 
hissed. "Dont you dast to beller! Dont you. Dar hitis. See? Here. You fixinto start ef you stays here. Come on, les go see ef dey started knockin ball 
yit."He took Ben's arm anddrew him up and they went to the fence and 
stood side by side there, peering between the matted honeysuckle not yet 
in bloom.

 "Dar," Luster said. "Dar come some. See um?"

 They watched the foursome play onto the green and out, and move to 
the tee and drive. Ben watched, whimpering, slobbering. When the 
foursome went on he followed along the fence, bobbing and moaning. One 
said,

 "Here, caddie. Bring the bag."

 "Hush, Benjy," Luster said, butBen went on at his shambling trot, 
clinging to the fence, wailing in his hoarse, hopeless voice. The man played 
and went on, Ben keeping pace with him until the fence turned at right 
angles, and he clung to the fence, watching the people move on andaway.

 "Will you hushnow?" Luster said. "Will youhush now?" He shookBen's 
arm. Ben clung to the fence, wailing steadily and hoarsely. "Aint yougwinestop?" Luster said. "Oris you?"Ben gazed through the fence. "All right, 
den," Luster said. "You wantsomethin tobelier about?" He looked over hisshoulder, toward the house. Then he whispered: "Caddy! Beller now. 
"Caddy! "Caddy! "Caddy!

 A moment later, in the slow intervals of Ben's voice, Luster heardDilsey 
calling.He took Ben by the arm and they crossed the yard toward her.

 "I tole you he warnt gwine stay quiet," Luster said.

 "You vilyun!" Dilsey said. "Whut you done to him?"

 "I aint done nothin. I tole you when dem folks start playin, he git started 
up."

 "You come on here," Dilsey said. "Hush,Benjy. Hush,now." But he 
wouldn't hush. They crossed the yard quickly and went to the cabin and 
entered. "Run git dat shoe," Dilsey said. "Dont you sturb Miss Cahline, 
now. Ef she say anything, tell her I got him.Go on,now; you kin shodo dat 


right, I reckon." Luster went out.Dilsey led Ben to the bed and drew himdown beside her and she held him, rocking back and forth, wiping hisdrooling mouth upon the hem of her skirt. "Hush,now,"she said, stroking 
his head. "Hush. Dilsey got you."But he bellowed slowly, abjectly, without 
tears; the grave hopeless sound ofall voiceless misery under the sun. 
Luster returned, carrying a white satin slipper. It was yellow now, and 
cracked, and soiled, and when they gave it into Ben's hand he hushed for a 
while. But he still whimpered, andsoon he lifted his voice again.

 "You reckon you kin find T. P.?"Dilsey said.

 "He say yistiddy he gwine out to St John's today.Say he be backatfo."

Dilsey rocked back and forth,strokingBen's head.

 "Dis long time, OJesus," she said. "Dis long time."

 "I kin drive dat surrey, mammy," Luster said.

 "You kill bofe y'all," Dilsey said. "You do hit fer devilment. I knows you 
got plenty sense to. But I cant trust you. Hush, now," she said. "Hush. 
Hush."

 "Nome I wont," Luster said. "I drives wid T. P." Dilsey rocked back and 
forth, holdingBen."Miss Cahline say ef you cant quiet him, she gwine gitup en come down en do hit."

 "Hush, honey," Dilsey said, strokingBen's head."Luster, honey," she 
said. "Will you think about yo ole mammy en drive dat surrey right?"

 "Yessum," Luster said. "I drive hit jes like T. P."

Dilsey stroked Ben's head, rocking back and forth. "I does de tees I kin," 
she said. "Lewd knows dat. Go git it, den," she said, rising. Luster scuttledout. Ben held the slipper, crying. "Hush, now. Luster gone to git de surrey 
en take you to de graveyard. We aint gwine risk gittin yo cap," she said. She 
went to a closet contrived of a calico curtain hung acrossa corner of the 
room and got the felt hat she had worn. "We's down to worse'n dis, ef folks 
jes knowed," she said."You's de Lawd's chile anyway. En Ibe His'n too, fo 
long, praise Jesus.Here." She putthe hat on his head and buttoned hiscoat. He wailed steadily.She took the slipper from him and putit away and 
they went out. Luster came up, with an ancient white horse in abattered 
and lopsided surrey.

 "You gwine be careful, Luster?"she said.

 "Yessum," Luster said. She helped Ben into the back seat. He hadceased 


crying, butnow he began to whimper again.

 "Hit's his flower," Luster said. "Wait, I'll git him one."

 "You set right dar," Dilsey said.She went and took the cheekstrap. 
"Now, hurry en git him one." Luster ran around the house, toward the 
garden. He came back witha single narcissus.

 "Dat un broke," Dilseysaid."Whyn't you git him a goodun?"

 "Hit de onliest one I could find," Luster said. "Y'all took all of um Friday 
to dec'rate de church. Wait, I'll fixhit."So while Dilsey held the horse 
Luster put a splint on the flower stalk with a twig and two bits of string and 
gave it to Ben. Then he mounted and took the reins. Dilsey still held the 
bridle.

 "You knows de way now?" she said. "Up de street, round de square, to de 
graveyard, den straight back home."

 "Yessum," Luster said. "Hum up, Queenie."

 "You gwine be careful,now?"

 "Yessum." Dilsey released the bridle.

 "Hum up,Queenie," Luster said.

 "Here," Dilsey said."You hen me dat whup."

 "Aw, mammy," Luster said.

 "Give hit here," Dilsey said, approaching the wheel. Luster gave itto her 
reluctantly.

 "I wont never git Queenie started now."

 "Never you mind about dat," Dilsey said. "Queenie know mo boutwhar 
she gwine den you does. All you got to do es set dar en hold dem reins. You 
knows de way, now?"

 "Yessum.Same way T. P. goes ev'y Sunday."

 "Den you do de same thing disSunday."

 "Cose I is. Aint I drove fer T. P. mo'n a hund'ed times?"

 "Den do hit again," Dilsey said."G'awn, now.En ef you hurts Benjy,
nigger boy, I dont know whut I do. You bound fer de chain gang, butI'llsend you dar fo even chain gang ready fer you."

 "Yessum," Luster said. "Hum up, Queenie."

 He flapped the lines on Queenie's broad backand the surrey lurched 
into motion.

 "You; Luster!" Dilsey said. 


 "Hum up, dar!" Luster said. He flapped the lines again. With 
subterranean rumblings Queenie jogged slowly down the drive and turned 
into the street, where Luster exhorted her into a gait resembling a 
prolonged and suspended fall in aforward direction.

 Ben quit whimpering.He satin the middle of the seat, holding the 
repaired flower upright in his fist,his eyes serene andineffable. Directlybefore him Luster's bullet head turned backward continuallyuntil the 
house passed from view, then he pulled to the side of the street and whileBen watched him he descended and broke a switch from ahedge. Queenie 
lowered her head and fell to cropping the grassuntil Luster mountedand 
hauled her head up and harried her into motion again, then he squared hiselbows and with the switch and the reins held high he assumed a 
swaggeringattitude out of all proportion to the sedate cropping of 
Queenie's hooves and the organlike basso of her internal accompaniment. 
Motors passed them, and pedestrians; once a group ofhalf grown 
negroes:

 "Dar Luster. Whar you gwine Luster? To de boneyard?"

 "Hi," Luster said. "Aint de same boneyard y'all headed fen Hum up, 
elefump."

 They approached the square, where the Confederate soldier gazed with 
empty eyes beneathhis marble hand in wind and weather. Luster took stillanother notchin himselfand gave the imperviousQueenie a cut withthe 
switch, casting his glance about the square. "Dar Mr Jason car," he said, 
then he spied another group of negroes. "Les show dem niggers how 
quality does, Benjy," he said.

 "Whut you say?"He looked back. Ben sat, holding the flower in his fist, 
his gaze empty anduntroubled. Luster hit Queenie again and swung her to 
the left at the monument.

 For an instant Ben sat in an utter hiatus. Then he bellowed. Bellow on 
bellow, his voice mounted, withscarce interval for breath. There was more 
than astonishment in it,it was horror; shock; agony eyeless, tongueless; 
just sound, and Luster's eyes backrolling for a white instant. "Gret God," he 
said. "Hush!Hush! Gret God!" He whirled again and struck Queenie with 
the switch. It broke and he cast it away and with Ben's voice mounting 
toward its unbelievable crescendo Luster caughtup the end of the reins 


and leaned forward asJason camejumpingacross the square and onto the 
step.

With a backhanded blow he hurled Luster aside and caught the reins 
and sawed Queenie about and doubled the reins back and slashed her 
across the hips.He cut her again and again,intoa plunging gallop, whileBen's hoarse agony roared about them, and swung her about to the right of 
the monument. Then he struck Luster over the head with his fist.

 "Dont you know any better than to take him to the left?" he said. He 
reached back and struck Ben,breaking the flower stalk again. "Shut up!" he 
said. "Shut up!" He jerked Queenie back and jumped down. "Get to hell on 
home with him. If you ever cross that gate with him again, I'll kill you!"

 "Yes, suh!" Luster said. He took the reins and hit Queenie with the end 
of them. "Gitup! Git up, dar! Benjy, fer God's sake!"

 Ben's voice roared and roared. Queenie moved again, her feet began to 
clop-clop steadily again, and at once Ben hushed. Luster looked quicklyback over his shoulder, then he drove on. The broken flower drooped over 
Ben's fist and his eyes were empty and blue and serene again as cornice 
and fa&ccirc;ade flowed smoothlyonce more from left to right, post and 
tree, window and doorway and signboard each inits ordered place. 

ew York, N.Y.

ober 1928 


APPENDIX 

Compson1699-1945 

IKKEMOTUBBE. A dispossessedAmerican king. Called "l'Homme"(and 
sometimes"de l'homme") by hisfosterbrother, a Chevalier of France,who 
had he not been born too late could have been among the brightest in that 
glittering galaxy of knightlyblackguards who were Napoleon's marshals, 
who thus translated the Chickasaw title meaning"The Man"; which 
translation Ikkemotubbe, himselfa man of witand imagination as well as a 
shrewd judge of character, including his own, carried one step further and 
anglicised it to "Doom." Who granted out of his vast lost domain a solidsquare mile of virgin North Mississippi dirt as truly angled as the four 
corners of a cardtable top (forested then because these were the old days 
before 1833 when the stars fell and Jefferson Mississippi was one long 
rambling onestorey mudchinked log building housing the Chickasaw Agent 
and his tradingpost store) to the grandson of aScottish refugee who had 
lost his own birthright by casting his lot with aking who himself hadbeen 
dispossessed. This in partial return for the right to proceed in peace, by 
whatever means he and his people saw fit, afoot or a horse provided they 
were Chickasaw horses, to the wild western land presently to be calledOklahoma:not knowing then about the oil. 

JACKSON. A Great White Fatherwith a sword. (An old duellist,a brawlinglean fierce mangy durable imperishable old lion who set the wellbeing of 
the nation above the White House and the health ofhisnew politicalparty 
above either and above them all set not his wife's honorbut the principlethat honor mustbe defended whether it was or not because defended itwas whether or not.) Who patented sealed and countersigned the grant 
with his own hand in his gold tepee in Wassi Town,not knowing about the 
oil either: so that one day the homeless descendants of the dispossessed 
would ride supine with drink and splendidly comatose above the dusty 
allotted harborage of theirbonesin speciallybuilt scarletpainted hearses 


and fire-engines.

 These were Compsons: 

QUENTIN MACLACHAN. Son ofa Glasgow printer, orphaned and raised 
by his mother's people in the Perth highlands. Fled to Carolina from 
Culloden Moor witha claymore and the tartan he wore by day and slept 
under bynight, and little else. At eighty, having fought once against an 
English kingand lost, he would not make that mistake twice and so fled 
again one night in 1779, with hisinfant grandson and the tartan (the 
claymore had vanished, along with his son, the grandson's father from one 
of Tarleton's regiments on aGeorgia battlefield about a yea;ago) into 
Kentucky, where a neighbornamed Boon or Boone had already established 
a settlement. 

CHARLESSTUART. Attainted and proscribed by name and grade in hisBritish regiment. Left for dead in a Georgia swamp byhis own retreatingarmy and then by the advancingAmerican one, both of which were wrong. 
He still had the claymore even when on his homemade wooden leg he 
finally overtook hisfather and son four years later atHarrodsburg, 
Kentucky, justin time tobury the father and enter upon a long period of 
being a split personality while stilltrying tobe the schoolteacher which he 
believed he wanted to be, until he gave up at lastandbecame the gamblerhe actually was and which no Compson seemed to realize they all were 
provided the gambit was desperate and the odds long enough. Succeeded 
at last in risking not only his neckbut the security of his familyand the 
very integrity of the name he would leave behind him, by joining the 
confederation headed by an acquaintance named Wilkinson (a man of 
considerable talent and influence and intellect and power) in a plot to 
secede the whole MississippiValley from the United Statesand join it to 
Spain. Fled in his turn when the bubble burst (asanyone except a Compson 
schoolteacher should have known it would), himself unique in beingthe 
only one of the plotters who had to flee the country: thisnot from the 
vengeance and retribution of the government which he had attempted to 
dismember,but from the furious revulsion of his late confederates now 


frantic for their own safety. He was not expelled from the United States, he 
talked himself countryless, his expulsion due not to the treason but to hishaving been so vocal and vociferant in the conduct of it,burning each 
bridge vocally behind him before he had even reached the place to buildthe next one: so that it was no provost marshalnor even a civic agency but 
his late coplotters themselves who put afoot the movement to evict himfrom Kentuckyand the United States and, if they had caught him, probablyfrom the world too. Fled by night,running true to family tradition, with hisson and the old claymore and the tartan. 

JASON LYCURGUS. Who, driven perhaps by the compulsion of the 
flamboyant name given him by the sardonic embittered woodenlegged 
indomitable father who perhaps still believed with his heart that what he 
wanted to be was a classicist schoolteacher, rode up the Natchez Trace one 
day in 1811 with a pair of fine pistols and one meagre saddlebag on asmalllightwaisted but stronghocked mare which could do the first two furlongs 
in definitelyunder the halfminute and the next twoin not appreciablymore, though that was all. But it was enough: who reached the Chickasaw 
Agency at Okatoba (which in 1860was stillcalled Old Jefferson)andwent 
no further. Who within six months was the Agent's clerk and within twelve 
his partner, officially still the clerk though actually halfowner of what was 
now a considerable store stocked with the mare's winningsin racesagainst 
the horses of Ikkemotubbe's young men which he, Compson, was always 
careful to limit to a quarter or at most three furlongs, and in the nextyear 
it was Ikkemotubbe who owned the little mare and Compson ownedthe 
solid square mile of land which someday would be almost in the center of 
the town of Jefferson, forested then and still forested twenty years later 
though rather a park than a forestby that time, withits slavequarters and 
stablesand kitchengardensand the formal lawnsand promenades and 
pavilions laid outby the same architect who built the columned porticoed 
house furnished by steamboat from France and New Orleans, and still the 
square intact mile in 1840 (withnot only the little white village calledJefferson beginning to enclose itbut an entire white countyabout to 
surround it because in a few yearsnow Ikkemotubbe's descendants and 
people would be gone, those remaining livingnot as warriorsand hunters 


butas white men--asshiftless farmers or, here and there, the masters of 
what they too called plantations and the owners of shiftless slaves,alittledirtier than the white man,a littlelazier, a little crueller--until at lasteven 
the wild blood itself would have vanished, tobe seen only occasionally inthe noseshape ofa Negro on a cottonwagon or a white sawmill handor 
trapper or locomotive fireman), known as the Compson Domain then, 
since nowit was fit to breed princes, statesmen and generalsandbishops, 
to avenge the dispossessed Compsons from Culloden and Carolinaand 
Kentucky then known as the Governor's house because sure enoughin timeit did produce or at least spawn a governor--Quentin MacLachan again,
after the Culloden grandfather--and still known as the OldGovernor's even 
after it had spawned (1861)a general--(called soby predetermined accord 
and agreementby the whole town and county, as though they knew even 
then and beforehand that the old governor was the last Compson who 
would not fail at everything he touched save longevity or suicide)--the 
Brigadier Jason Lycurgus II whofailed at Shiloh in '62 and failed againthoughnot sobadly at Resaca in '64, who put the first mortgage on the stillintact square mile to a New England carpetbagger in '66, after the old town 
had been burned by the Federal General Smith and the new little town, in 
time to be populated mainlyby the descendants not of Compsonsbut ofSnopeses, had begun to encroachand then nibble atand into itas the 
failed brigadier spent the next forty years sellingfragments of it off to keep 
up the mortgage on the remainder: until one dayin 1900 he died quietly on 
an army cot in the hunting and fishing camp in the Tallahatchie River 
bottom where he passed most of the end of his days.

 And even the old governor was forgotten now; what was left of theoldsquare mile wasnow known merely as the Compson place--the 
weedchoked traces of the old ruined lawns and promenades, the house 
which had needed painting too long already, the scaling columns of the 
portico where Jason III (bred for alawyer and indeedhe kept an office 
upstairs above the Square, where entombed in dusty filingcases some of 
the oldest names in the county--Holston and Sutpen,Grenier and 
Beauchamp and Coldfield--faded year by year among the bottomless 
labyrinths of chancery: and who knowswhat dream in the perennialheart 
of his father, now completing the third of his three avatars--the one as son 


of a brilliant and gallant statesman, the second as battleleader of brave and 
gallantmen, the third asa sort ofprivileged pseudo-Daniel Boone-
Robinson Crusoe, who had not returned to juvenilitybecause actually he 
had never left it--that that lawyer's office might again be the anteroom to 
the governor's mansion and the old splendor) sat all day long with a 
decanter of whiskey and a litter ofdogeared Horaces and Livys and 
Catulluses, composing (it was said) caustic and satiric eulogies on both hisdead and his livingfellowtownsmen, who sold the last of the property, 
except that fragment containing the house and the kitchengarden and the 
collapsing stables and one servant's cabin in which Dilsey's family lived, to 
a golfclub for the ready money with which his daughter Candace couldhave her fine weddingin Apriland his son Quentin could finish one year at 
Harvard and commit suicide in the following June of 1910, already known 
as the Old Compson place even while Compsons were still livinginiton 
that spring duskin 1928 when the old governor's doomed lost nameless 
seventeen-year-old greatgreatgranddaughter robbed her last remaining 
sane male relative (her uncle Jason IV) ofhis secret hoard of money and 
climbed down a rainpipe and ran off with a pitchman in a travellingstreetshow, and still known as the Old Compson place long after all traces 
of Compsons were gone from it:after the widowed mother died and Jason 
IV, no longer needing to fear Dilsey now, committed his idiotbrother, 
Benjamin, to the State Asylum in Jackson and sold the house to a 
countryman who operated it as a boarding house for juries and horse- and 
muletraders, and still known as the Old Compson place even after the 
boardinghouse (and presently the golfcourse too) had vanished and the oldsquare mile was even intact againin row after row of small crowded 
jerrybuilt individuallyowned demiurban bungalows.

 And these: 

QUENTIN III. Who loved not his sister's body but some concept of 
Compson honor precariously and (he knew well) only temporarilysupported by the minute fragile membrane of her maidenhead as a 
miniature replica of all the whole vast globy earth maybe poised on the 
nose of a trained seal. Who loved not the idea of the incest which he wouldnot commit,but some presbyterian concept of its eternal punishment: he, 


not God, couldby thatmeans casthimselfand his sister both into hell,
where he could guard her forever and keep her forevermore intact amid the 
eternal fires. But who loved death above all, who loved only death, loved 
and lived in a deliberate and almost perverted anticipation of deathas a 
lover loves and deliberately refrains from the waiting willingfriendlytender incredible body of-hisbeloved, until he can no longer bear not the 
refrainingbut the restraint and soflings, hurls himself relinquishing, 
drowning. Committed suicide in Cambridge Massachusetts,June 1910, two 
monthsafter his sister's wedding, waiting first to complete the current 
academic year and so get the full value of his paid-in-advance tuition, not 
because he had his old Culloden and Carolina and Kentucky grandfathers 
in him butbecause the remaining piece of the old Compson mile which had 
been sold to pay for his sister's wedding and his year atHarvard hadbeen 
the one thing, excepting that same sister and the sight of an open fire, 
which his youngest brother, born an idiot, had loved. 

CANDACE (CADDY). Doomed and knew it, accepted the doom without 
either seeking or fleeing it. Loved her brother despite him, loved not only 
him but loved in him thatbitter prophet and inflexible corruptless judge of 
what he considered the family's honor and its doom, as he thought heloved 
but really hated in her what he considered the frail doomed vessel of its 
pride and the foul instrument of its disgrace, not only this, she loved himnot onlyin spite ofbutbecause ofthe fact that he himself wasincapable of 
love, accepting the fact that he must value above all not herbut the 
virginity of which she was custodian and on which she placed no value 
whatever: the frail physicalstricture which to her was no more than a 
hangnail would have been.Knew the brother loved death best of all and 
was notjealous, would (and perhaps in the calculation and deliberation of 
her marriage did) have handed him the hypothetical hemlock. Was two 
months pregnant with another man's child which regardless of whatits sex 
would be she had alreadynamedQuentin after the brother whom they 
both (she and her brother) knew was already the same as dead, when she 
married (1910) an extremely eligible young Indianian she and her mother 
had met while vacationing at French Lick the summer before. Divorced by 
him 1911. Married 1920 to a minor movingpicture magnate,Hollywood 


California. Divorced by mutual agreement, Mexico 1925. Vanished in Paris 
with the German occupation,1940, skill beautiful and probably still 
wealthy too since she did not lookwithin fifteen years of her actualfortyeight, and was notheard of again. Except there was a woman in 
Jefferson, the county librarian, amousesized and -colored woman who had 
never married who had passed through the city schoolsin the same class 
with Candace Compson and then spent the rest of her life trying to keep 
Forever Amber inits orderly overlappingavatarsand Jurgen and Tom 
Jones out of the hands of the highschool juniors and seniors who couldreach them down without even having to tip-toe from the backshelves 
where she herself would have to stand on a box to hide them. One day in1943,after a week of a distraction bordering on disintegration almost, 
during which those entering the library would find her alwaysin the act of 
hurriedly closing her desk drawer and turning the key in it (so that the 
matrons, wives of the bankers anddoctors and lawyers, some of whom had 
also been in that old highschool class, who came and went in the 
afternoons with the copies of the Forever Ambers and the volumes of 
Thorne Smith carefully wrappedfrom view in sheets of Memphis and 
Jackson newspapers, believed she was on the verge of illness or perhaps 
even loss of mind) she closed and locked the library in the middle of the 
afternoon and with her handbag clasped tightly under her arm and two 
feverish spots of determination in her ordinarily colorless cheeks, she 
entered the farmers' supply store where Jason IV had started as a clerk and 
where he now owned his own business asa buyer of and dealer in cotton, 
striding on through that gloomy cavern which only men ever entered--a 
cavern cluttered and walled and stalagmitehung with plowsand discs and 
loops of tracechain and singletrees and mulecollars and sidemeatand 
cheap shoes and horselinament and flour and molasses, gloomy because 
the goods it contained were not shown but hidden rather since those who 
supplied Mississippi farmers or at least Negro Mississippifarmers for a 
share of the crop did not wish,until that crop was made and its value 
approximately computable, to show them what they could learn to want 
but only to supply them on specific demand with what they couldnot help 
butneed--and strode on back to Jason's particular domain in the rear: a 
railed enclosure cluttered with shelves and pigeonholes bearing spiked 


dust-and-lintgathering gin receipts and ledgers and cottonsamples and 
rank with the blended smell of cheese and kerosene and harnessoil and the 
tremendous iron stove against which chewed tobacco had been spat for 
almost a hundred years, and up tothe long highsloping counter behindwhich Jason stood and, not looking again at the overalled men who had 
quietly stopped talking and even chewing when she entered, with a kind of 
fainting desperation she opened the handbag and fumbled something out 
of it and laid it open on the counter andstood trembling and breathingrapidly while Jason looked down at it--a picture, a photograph in color 
clipped obviously from a slick magazine--a picture filled with luxuryand 
money and sunlight--a Cannebière backdrop of mountains and palms and 
cypresses and the sea, an open powerful expensive chromium/rimmed 
sports car, the woman's face hatless between a rich scarfand a seal coat, 
ageless andbeautiful, cold serene and damned; beside her a handsome 
lean man of middleage in the ribbons and tabs of aGerman staffgeneral-and 
the mousesized mousecolored spinster tremblingand aghast ather 
own temerity, staring acrossit at the childless bachelor in whom ended 
that long line of men who had had something in them of decency and pride 
even after they had begun to failat the integrity and the pride had become 
mostly vanity and selfpity: from the expatriate who had to flee hisnative 
land with little else except his life yet who still refused to accept defeat, 
through the man who gambled hislife and his good name twice and lost 
twice and declined to accept that either, and the one who with onlyaclever 
small quarterhorse for tool avenged his dispossessed father and 
grandfather and gained a principality, and the brilliantand gallant 
governor and the general who though he failed at leading in battle brave 
and gallant men at least risked hisown life too in the failing, to the 
cultured dipsomaniac who sold the last of his patrimony not to buy drinkbut to give one of his descendantsat least the best chance in life he couldthink of.

'It's Caddy!' the librarian whispered. 'We must save her!'

 'It's Cad, all right,' Jason said.Then he began to laugh.He stood there 
laughingabove the picture, above the cold beautiful face now creased and 
dogeared from its week's sojourn in the desk drawer and the handbag. And 
the librarian knew why he was laughing, whohad not called him anything 


but Mr Compson for thirty-two years now, ever since the day in 1911when 
Candace, cast off by her husband,had brought her infant daughter home 
and left the child and departed by the next train, to return no more, and 
not only the Negro cook, Dilsey, but the librarian too divined by simpleinstinct that Jason was somehowusing the child's life andits illegitimacy 
both to blackmail the mother not only into staying awayfrom Jefferson for 
the rest of her life butintoappointing him sole unchallengeable trustee of 
the money she would send for the child's maintenance, and had refused to 
speak to him at all since that dayin 1928 when the daughter climbed down 
the rainpipe and ran away with the pitchman.

'Jason!' she cried. 'We must save her! Jason! Jason!'--and still crying iteven when he took up the picture between thumband finger and threw itback across the counter toward her.

'That Candace?' he said. 'Don'tmake me laugh. This bitch aint thirty 
yet. The other one's fifty now.'

 And the library wasstill locked all the next day too when at three oclock 
in the afternoon, footsore and spent yet stillunflagging and still claspingthe handbag tightly under her arm, she turned into a neat small yard in the 
Negro residence section of Memphis and mounted the steps of the neat 
small house and rang the bell andthe door opened and a black woman of 
about her own age looked quietly out at her. 'It's Frony, isn't it?' the 
librarian said. 'Dontyou remember me--Melissa Meek, from Jefferson--'

 'Yes,' the Negress said. 'Come in. You want to see Mama.' And she 
entered the room, the neat yet cluttered bedroom of an old Negro, rank 
with the smell of old people, old women, old Negroes, where the oldwoman herself sat in a rocker beside the hearth where even though it was 
June a fire smoldered--a big woman once, in faded clean calico and an 
immaculate turban wound round her head above the bleared and now 
apparently almost sightless eyes--and put the dogeared clippinginto the 
black hands which, like the women of her race, were still as supple and 
delicately shaped as they hadbeen when she was thirty or twenty or even 
seventeen.

'It's Caddy!' the librarian said. 'It is! Dilsey! Dilsey!'

 'What did he say?' the old Negress said. And the librarian knew whom 
she meantby 'he', nor did the librarian marvel, not only that the old 


Negress would know thatshe (the librarian) would know whom she meant 
by the 'he', but that the old Negress would know at once that she had 
already shown the picture to Jason.

'Dont you know what he said?' she cried. 'When he realised she was indanger, he said it was her, even if I hadn't even had a picture to show him.
But as soon as he realised that somebody, anybody, even just me, wanted 
to save her, would try to save her, he said it wasn't. But itis! Look atit!'

 'Look at my eyes,' the old Negress said. 'How can I see that picture?'

'Call Frony!' the librarian cried. 'She will know her!' Butalready the oldNegress was folding the clipping carefullyback into its old creases, handingit back.

'My eyes aint any good anymore,' she said. 'I cant see it.'

 And that was all. Atsix oclock she fought her way through the crowded 
bus terminal, the bag clutched under one arm and the return half of her 
roundtrip ticket in the other hand, and was swept out onto the roaring 
platform on the diurnal tide of a few middleaged civilians but mostlysoldiers and sailors enroute eitherto leave or to death and the homeless 
young women, their companions, who for two years now had lived from 
day to day in pullmansand hotelswhen they were lucky and in daycoaches 
and bussesand stations and lobbies and public restrooms when not, 
pausing only long enough to drop their foals in charity wards or 
policestations and then move on again, and foughther way into the bus, 
smaller than any other there so that her feet touched the floor only 
occasionally untila shape (aman in khaki;she couldn't see him at allbecause she was already crying) rose and picked her up bodily and set her 
into aseat next the window, where still crying quietly she could lookout 
upon the fleeing cityas it streaked past and then wasbehind and presentlynow she would be home again, safe in Jefferson where life lived too with allits incomprehensible passion and turmoil and grief and fury and despair, 
but here at six oclock you could close the covers on it and even the 
weightless hand of a child could put itback amongitsunfeatured kindred 
on the quiet eternal shelves and turn the key upon it for the whole and 
dreamless night. Yes she thought,crying quietly that was it she didn't 
want to see it know whether it was Caddy or not because she knows 


Caddy doesn't want to be saved hasn't anything anymore worth beingsaved for nothing worth being lost that she can lose 

JASON IV. The first sane Compson since before Culloden and (a childless 
bachelor) hence the last. Logical rational contained and even a philosopher 
in the old stoic tradition: thinkingnothing whatever of God one wayor the 
other and simply considering the police and so fearing and respecting only 
the Negro woman, his sworn enemysince his birth and his mortal one 
since that day in 1911 when she too divined bysimple clairvoyance that he 
was somehow using his infant niece's illegitimacy toblackmailits mother,
who cooked the food he ate. Who not onlyfended off end held his own with 
Compsons but competed and held his own with the Snopeses who took 
over the little town following the turn of the century as the Compsons and 
Sartorises and their ilkfaded fromit (noSnopes,butJason Compson 
himself whoas soon as his motherdied--the niece had already climbed 
down the rainpipe and vanished so Dilsey no longer had either of these 
clubs to hold over him-- committed his idiot younger brother to the state 
and vacated the old house, first choppingup the vast oncesplendid rooms 
into what he called apartments and selling the whole thing to a 
countryman who opened a boardinghouse in it), though this wasnot 
difficult since to him all the rest of the town and the world and the human 
race too except himself were Compsons,inexplicable yet quite predictablein that they were in no sense whatever to be trusted. Who, all the money 
from the sale of the pasture having gone for his sister's wedding andhisbrother's course at Harvard, used his own niggard savings out of his 
meagre wages as a storeclerk to send himself toa Memphis school where 
he learned to class and grade cotton, and so established his own business 
with which, following his dipsomaniac father's death, he assumed the 
entire burden of the rottingfamilyin the rotting house, supportinghis idiot 
brother because of their mother, sacrificing what pleasures might have 
been the right and just due and even the necessity ofa thirty-year-oldbachelor, so that his mother's life might continue asnearly as possible to 
what it hadbeen this notbecause he loved her but (a sane man always) 
simplybecause he wasafraid of the Negro cook whom he could not even 
force to leave even when he tried to stop paying her weekly wages, and who 


despite all this, stillmanaged to save almost three thousand dollars 
($2840. 50) as he reported it on the night his niece stole it, in niggard and 
agonised dimes and quarters andhalfdollars, which hoard he kept in no 
bankbecause to him abanker toowas just one more Compson,buthid in a 
locked bureau drawer in hisbedroom whose bed he made and changed 
himself since he kept the bedroom door locked all the time save when he 
was passing through it. Who, following afumblingabortive attempt by hisidiot brother on a passingfemale child, had himself appointed the idiot'sguardian without letting their mother know and so was able to have the 
creature castrated before the mother even knew it was out of the house, 
and who following the mother's death in 1933 was able to free himself 
forever not only from the idiotbrother and the house butfrom the Negro 
woman too,moving into a pair ofoffices upa flight of stairs above the 
supplystore containing his cotton ledgers and samples, which he had 
converted into a bedroom-kitchen-bath,in and out of which on weekends 
there would be seen a big plain friendly brazenhaired pleasantfaced woman 
no longer very young, in round picture hats and (in its season)an imitation 
fur coat, the two of them, the middleaged cottonbuyer and the woman 
whom the town called, simply, hisfriend from Memphis, seen at the local 
picture show on Saturday night and on Sundaymorning mounting the 
apartment stairs with paper bagsfrom the grocer's containing loavesand 
eggs and oranges and cans of soup, domestic, uxorious, connubial, untilthe late afternoon bus carried her back to Memphis.He was emancipated 
now. He wasfree. 'In 1865,' he would say, 'Abe Lincoln freed the niggersfrom the Compsons. In 1933,Jason Compson freed the Compsonsfrom the 
niggers.' 

BENJAMIN. Born Maury, after his mother's only brother: a handsome 
flashing swaggering worklessbachelor who borrowed money from almost 
anyone, even Dilseyalthough she was a Negro, explaining to her as he 
withdrew his hand from his pocket that she wasnot onlyin his eyes the 
same asa member of his sister's family, she would be considered a born 
lady anywhere in any eyes. Who, when at last even his mother realised 
what he was and insisted weepingthat hisname mustbe changed, was 
rechristened Benjamin by hisbrother Quentin (Benjamin, our lastborn, 


soldinto Egypt). Who loved three things: the pasture which was sold to pay 
for Candace's wedding and to send Quentin toHarvard, his sister Candace, 
firelight. Who lostnone of them because he could not remember his sister 
but only the loss of her, and firelight was the same bright shape as going to 
sleep, and the pasture was even better sold than before because nowhe and 
TP could not onlyfollow timeless along the fence the motions which it didnot even matter to him were humanbeingsswinging golfsticks, TP couldlead them to clumps of grass or weeds where there would appear suddenly 
in TP's hand small white spherules which competed with and even 
conquered what he did not even know was gravity and all the immutablelaws when released from the handtoward plank floor or smokehouse wall 
or concrete sidewalk. Gelded 1913. Committed to the State Asylum, 
Jackson 1933. Lost nothing then either because, as with his sister, he 
remembered not the pasture but only its loss, and firelight was still the 
same bright shape ofsleep. 

QUENTIN. The last. Candace's daughter. Fatherless nine monthsbefore 
her birth, nameless atbirth and already doomed to be unwed from the 
instant the dividing egg determined its sex. Who at seventeen, on the one 
thousand eight hundred ninetyfifth anniversary of the day before the 
resurrection of Our Lord, swung herself by a rainpipe from the window of 
the room in whichher uncle had locked her at noon, to the locked window 
of his own locked and empty bedroom andbroke a pane and entered the 
window and with the uncle's firepoker burst open the locked bureau 
drawer and took the money (it was not $2840. 50 either, it was almost 
seven thousand dollars and this was Jason's rage, the red unbearable fury 
which on that night and at intervals recurring with little or no 
diminishment for the next five years, made him seriouslybelieve would at 
some unwarned instant destroy him, kill him asinstantaneously dead as a 
bullet or a lightningbolt: that although he hadbeen robbed not ofa mere 
petty three thousand dollars but of almost seven thousand he couldn't even 
tell anybody; because he had been robbed of seven thousand dollars 
instead of just three he could not only never receive justification--he didnot wantsympathy--from other men unlucky enough to have one bitch for 
a sister and another for a niece, he couldn't even go to the police; because 


he had lost four thousand dollarswhich did not belong to him he couldn't 
even recover the three thousand which did since those first four thousand 
dollars were notonly the legal property of his niece as a part of the money 
supplied for her support and maintenance by her mother over the last 
sixteen years, they did not exist atall, having been officially recorded as 
expended and consumed in the annual reports he submitted to the district 
Chancellor, as required of him as guardian and trustee byhisbondsmen: 
so that he hadbeen robbed not only of his thievings but his savings too, 
and by his own victim; he had been robbed not only of the four thousand 
dollars which he had risked jail toacquire but of the three thousandwhich 
he had hoarded at the price of sacrifice and denial,almost anickel and a 
dime at a time, over a period of almost twenty years:and this not only by 
his own victim butby a child who did it at one blow, without premeditation 
or plan, not even knowing or even caring how much she would find when 
she broke the drawer open; and now he couldn't even go to the police for 
help: he who had considered the police always, never given them any 
trouble, had paid the taxes for years which supported them in parasitic and 
sadisticidleness;not only that, he didn't dare pursue the girl himself 
because he might catch her and she would talk, so that his only recourse 
was a vain dream whichkept him tossing and sweating on nights two andthree and even four years after the event, when he should have forgotten 
about it: of catching her without warning, springing on her out of the dark, 
before she had spent all the money, and murder her before she had time to 
open hermouth) and climbed down the same rainpipe in the dusk and ran 
away with the pitchman who wasalready under sentence for bigamy.And 
so vanished; whatever occupation overtook her would have arrived in nochromium Mercedes; whatever snapshot would have contained no generalof staff.

 And that was all. These otherswere not Compsons. They were black: 

T.P.Who wore on Memphis's Beale Street the fine bright cheap 
intransigent clothes manufactured specifically for him by the ownersof 
Chicago and New York sweatshops. 

FRONY. Who married a pullman porter and went to St Louis to live and 
later moved back to Memphis tomake a home for her mother since Dilsey 
refused to go further than that. 

LUSTER.A man, aged 14. Who was not only capable of the complete care 
and security of an idiot twice his age and three times his size,but couldkeep him entertained. 

DILSEY.
They endured. 


 
